The world has changed since the last traveling Roy Lichtenstein retrospective, which opened at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York. Pop Art has not only continued to capture the imagination of the public, but it has also flourished, helped in part by social networking, global connectivity and a universal fascination with the media.
Curators at the Art Institute of Chicago and the Tate Modern in London have spent five years organizing their own retrospective, which opens in Chicago on May 16 before going to the National Gallery of Art in Washington in October, the Tate Modern in February 2013 and the Pompidou Center in Paris that July.
Unlike the Guggenheim show, which focused on Lichtenstein¡¯s paintings and sculptures, this exhibition features a significant number of his drawings ¡ª nearly 50. James Rondeau, chairman of contemporary art at the Chicago museum, who has put together the show with Sheena Wagstaff, chief curator of the Tate Modern, explained their reasoning: ¡°People don¡¯t understand that many of the images Lichtenstein took from advertisements, comic books, product packaging, you name it, are not exact reproductions. And it is through his drawings that you see the transformative act from original source to the finished painting.¡±
Lichtenstein, who , created images that are now the stuff of legend. He took advertisements for products like dishwashing detergents and foot medications, hot dogs and sneakers; he reinterpreted Monet and C¨¦zanne, Picasso and Brancusi, Chinese landscapes and architectural entablatures. And of course there were his most famous works ¡ª those deft yet humorous reinterpretations of comic books.
This show will cover the entire scope of Lichtenstein¡¯s career, from his earliest experimentation with abstraction right through to his late interpretations of the female nude. It will also chronicle the bumps along the way, like his early years, when his work was harshly criticized as vulgar and empty. (The title of a in 1964 asked, ¡°Is He the Worst Artist in the U.S.?¡±) The exhibition will also chart Lichtenstein¡¯s initial brush with success, after his in New York in 1962, when the art world began to take him seriously. And significant attention will be paid to his 1960s comic book paintings and drawings as well as his art historical images from the 1980s, when he became one of the most revered living painters in the world.
Some things will be new to viewers because they have never been included in a public exhibition. There will be works from the artist¡¯s family and estate and others that had been secreted away in private collections.
One section will be devoted to his examination of the female body ¡ª a subject he visited on and off throughout his career. Late in life he took this subject and filtered it through the lens of Matisse and Picasso. ¡°They are reinterpretations of the nude as an art historical genre,¡± Mr. Rondeau said, ¡°but these late works are also a kind of return to the fundamentals of Pop Art and to his 1960s comic book sources.
¡°It shows that he was a tried-and-true Pop Artist from beginning to end.¡±

The Frick Collection has no shortage of powerful portraits. Hanging on its walls are images by Rembrandt and Rubens; Gainsborough and Goya; Van Dyck and Vel¨¢zquez. Yet when presented with a choice of paintings to borrow from the Norton Simon Museum in Pasadena, Calif., as part of an exchange program, curators chose a van Gogh portrait that will hang in its Oval Room for about three months.
¡°It¡¯s one of the most beloved paintings in the Norton Simon¡¯s collection,¡± said Susan Galassi, the Frick¡¯s senior curator. ¡°We have also been focusing on artists that were a bit more modern.¡±
By ¡°modern¡± Ms. Galassi was referring to a small exhibition of works that surround the Frick¡¯s Renoir, ¡°La Promenade¡± (1875-76), including nine works on loan from seven museums through May 13 and its recent show of Picasso drawings.
Van Gogh¡¯s ¡°Portrait of a Peasant (Patience Escalier)¡± will be on view from Oct. 30 to Jan. 20. Painted while he was living in Arles, from 1888 to 1890, it depicts Escalier looking straight at the viewer, dressed in a green smock and a bright yellow straw hat. It has not left the Norton Simon in nearly 40 years.

Every year at the National Gallery of Art in Washington the trustees and patrons who make up its Collectors Committee provide money for acquisitions of contemporary art. What the curators buy is generally well out of the mainstream. ¡°We don¡¯t want to follow the market or fashions,¡± said Harry Cooper, the National Gallery¡¯s curator of modern and contemporary art.
This year¡¯s big acquisition is a painting by Simon Hanta?, an artist little known in this country but a major figure in France, where he lived as a recluse until .
He was known for creating ¡°visual silence,¡± manipulating and creasing his canvases as though they were a textile that could be folded or tied and then painting them. The patterns that emerged once the canvases were unfurled became the art.
Like Pollock, an artist Hanta? admired, Mr. Cooper explained, the works were about the contradictions of order versus randomness; chance versus control.
The National Gallery bought ¡°?tude,¡± a red and white abstract canvas from the height of Hanta?¡¯s career in 1969.
This is the first of his paintings to enter the gallery¡¯s collection. Mr. Cooper said a retrospective at the Pompidou Center in Paris next year is sure to raise Hanta?¡¯s profile.
¡°?tude¡± will go on view in Washington this month.

On the eve of the important spring auction season comes word that Christie¡¯s has lost one of its biggest business getters.
Thomas Seydoux, a 15-year veteran of the auction house, has resigned. Like many of his colleagues before him ¡ª , Franck Giraud, ¡ª he will start dealing privately.
As chairman of the company¡¯s Impressionist and modern art department, Mr. Seydoux has been an important figure in brokering lucrative private sales. He is also known for advising Russia¡¯s new, superrich collectors.
