This year the joys of spring in New York include the visit of a large, magnificently plainspoken self-portrait by Rembrandt to the . Never before exhibited in this country, it comes from the collection of Kenwood House in North London, which is closed for repairs; it will subsequently join other Kenwood paintings at the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, for an exhibition that will open in June and then travel to three other American museums.
But for the next several weeks the painting is on view at the Met ¡ª the centerpiece of ¡°Rembrandt at Work: The Great Self-Portrait From Kenwood House¡± ¡ª and wonderful almost beyond words. Painted around 1665, four years before Rembrandt¡¯s death at 63, it is his second-largest self-portrait, incredibly commanding yet ineffably gentle. It hangs in one of the Met¡¯s permanent collection galleries ¡ª Gallery 614 on the second floor, to be exact ¡ª beside the museum¡¯s smaller, more modest, earlier Rembrandt self-portrait, from 1660, along with a selection of nine later Rembrandt portraits, perceptively chosen and placed by Walter Liedtke, a curator in the Met¡¯s department of European paintings.
The assembled Rembrandt works at the Met vary greatly. Side by side, for example, are the imposing ¡°Aristotle With a Bust of Homer¡± and the touching portrait of Rembrandt¡¯s mistress Hendrickje Stoffels, leaning delicately forward, with an almost snapshotlike spontaneity; the Kenwood self-portrait splits the difference between them by being at once heroic, even tragic, and disarmingly intimate. And once you¡¯ve exhausted the possibilities of this gallery, you can also make the Kenwood picture and its neighbor the starting points of a D.I.Y. tour of other Rembrandt self-portraits that includes two more European loans elsewhere at the Met and a masterpiece that has been in the Frick Collection since its founding nearly 80 years ago. (More on this in a bit.)
If you are someone, like me, who tends to prefer Rembrandt¡¯s prints and drawings and finds his paintings at times a trifle sentimental and overly brown, the emotional directness and array of beautiful whites in the Kenwood picture should unsettle that thinking. It shows the aged artist, looking toward but not at us, holding a palette, brushes and maulstick and wearing a simple linen painter¡¯s cap whose brilliant white is echoed more quietly by his pallid skin, gray hair and the bit of white shirt visible above his dark-red tunic. He is in his studio, hard at work, intently studying his reflection, before turning to the canvas whose edge we can just barely discern at the right side of the painting, as if trying to grasp some elusive quality of his homely mien and state of mind.
The work¡¯s emotional gravity and psychic complexity underscore why Rembrandt is often likened to Shakespeare; no artist before him had painted human interiority in all its uneasy, ambivalent, conflicted glory. Again and again his portraits and self-portraits give us pictures of consciousness valiantly making its way through life. In some ways the consciousness that he captured most fully was his own, as it registered in the face he knew better than any other and also painted more often. (A total of 40 painted self-portraits survive.)
The Kenwood painting is a superb example of Rembrandt¡¯s late style, from a time when he had long forsaken the smooth-surfaced, so-called neat style of his earlier years and the Baroque compositional complexities of his middle period. The simple frontal pose and unadorned garb are about as Classical as Rembrandt gets; much of the surface exudes the painterly bravura of loose ¡ª or what the Dutch called rough ¡ª painting. The face is keenly real if still visibly textured; no one captures the play of light on aging flesh like Rembrandt, but he abbreviated or omitted other details as needed, keeping the reality of paint and process and the reality of his subject equally before the viewer in a way that still feels innovative and even proto-modern. Note that he doesn¡¯t disrupt the dark monolithic form of his body, clothed in black, brown and the dark red, by accentuating the hand that holds the palette with lighter flesh tones.
