Not quite two years ago the soprano released an album that constituted the biggest surprise of a noteworthy career: ¡°Dark Hope,¡± a collection of rock songs in plush arrangements, came out on Decca in June 2010. Most of the indie-rock acts represented on the disc, like Arcade Fire and the Mars Volta, were urged upon her by Q Prime, that hatched the idea.
When all but the biggest hit records seem ephemeral, you might think that this would be a dim memory to all but Ms. Fleming¡¯s most passionate devotees. But lately she has revisited ¡°Dark Hope¡± in concert. On Friday evening when Ms. Fleming performed with the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra at the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse for a ¡°Live From Lincoln Center¡± PBS telecast, songs from the album ended the show.
You can question her judgment in accepting an unorthodox assignment, but not her desire to stretch herself. Ms. Fleming, the latest in a long line of American household divas, has to contend with maintaining widespread appeal when mass-media interest in the art-music canon in which she established her career is at a low. Whether or not you enjoyed ¡°Dark Hope,¡± you had to admit that it was gutsy.
But courage does not make a project convincing, nor is indie rock a language that can be mastered like Czech. Little about ¡°Dark Hope¡± suggested that Ms. Fleming felt connected to what she sang; and fussy, overwrought arrangements didn¡¯t help.
Executed live with a skillful but overloud band and an underused Orpheus, songs by Muse, Band of Horses and Death Cab for Cutie refused to unclench ¡ª an effect underscored by Ms. Fleming¡¯s dutifully enacted rock-chick mannerisms. ¡°Hallelujah,¡± Leonard Cohen¡¯s downbeat anthem, withstood its treatment; Peter Gabriel¡¯s ¡°In Your Eyes,¡± though ostensibly as impervious, was suffocated with bloat.
The evening started with Barber¡¯s ¡°Knoxville: Summer of 1915,¡± in a potent, nuanced rendition that confirmed Ms. Fleming¡¯s enduring gifts, even under the ruthless scrutiny of microphones required for the telecast. (The effect is less evident in a .) John Kander¡¯s ¡°Letter From Sullivan Ballou,¡± performed midway through the program, was equally admirable; Ms. Fleming coaxed its rough tumble of syllables and sentiments into an affecting flow.
The balance of the program was devoted to musical theater, which Ms. Fleming described as an early and lingering passion. Even so, melodramatic effusions and gaudy embellishments offset scintillating climaxes and rhythmic surety in ¡°So in Love¡± (from Cole Porter¡¯s ¡°Kiss Me, Kate¡±). In chipper numbers (¡°Show Me,¡± from ¡°My Fair Lady¡±) and lush ones (¡°Moonfall,¡± from ¡°The Mystery of Edwin Drood¡±) alike, Ms. Fleming matched solid technique and clear commitment with interpretive heavy weather.
It seemed almost paradoxical, then, that a guest appearance by , a young pop crooner of operatic fervidity, brought out some of Ms. Fleming¡¯s most sympathetic singing in a brief medley from ¡°Brigadoon.¡± The pair showed a surprising affinity, accentuated by buoyant work from the consistently fine Orpheus players.
