IN Harlem sometimes a cane is more than just a cane.
The writer learned this not long ago while driving through the neighborhood with members of the New York Police Department¡¯s gang intelligence unit. Upon spotting a teenager carrying a garden-variety orthopedic cane ¡ª simple wood, J-shaped crook for a handle ¡ª the officers pulled over and seized it. Apparently canes are popular among gang members who know that knives and guns carry serious weapons charges.
¡°The cops open up their trunk,¡± Mr. Price said, ¡°and there¡¯s like 40 canes in there.¡±
Which is why viewers will see plenty of them swinging among the bats and pipes during a brawl on the first episode of ¡°NYC-22,¡± the Harlem crime drama Mr. Price developed for CBS.
Mr. Price has built his career on such moments: vivid details mined from firsthand observation. In novels like ¡°The Wanderers,¡± ¡°Clockers¡± and more recently ¡°Lush Life,¡± Mr. Price¡¯s photographic eye and celebrated ear for dialogue immerse readers in stories informed by the countless hours he has spent with the police and the policed.
David Simon, who borrowed from ¡°Clockers¡± the cops-and-streets split perspective he used in the HBO drama ¡°The Wire,¡± called that 1992 novel ¡°the ¡®Grapes of Wrath¡¯ of inner-city America.¡±
Mr. Price wrote for and is also an Oscar-nominated screenwriter (¡°The Color of Money¡±). With ¡°NYC-22,¡± which begins next Sunday, he adds series creator to his r¨¦sum¨¦. (The ¡°22¡± signifies the station¡¯s precinct number.)
The show tracks a diverse group of rookie officers through their early days on the job, and its creator¡¯s fingerprints will be evident to anyone familiar with the lyrical dialogue and richly drawn characters of his past work. On ¡°NYC-22¡± the banter crackles and the stationhouse and sidewalks teem with upstarts, street sages and thwarted dreamers. Harold House Moore plays an arrogant former basketball star returning to police his old neighborhood; Leelee Sobieski is a chilly ex-Marine; Adam Goldberg a laid-off newspaper reporter now patroling the beat he covered.
¡°There¡¯s this nuance and attention to detail with each character, and he starts tailoring them to your cadences,¡± said Terry Kinney, who plays the seen-it-all sergeant guiding the rookies through their growing pains. ¡°You¡¯re not aware that Richard¡¯s watching you, but he really is.¡±
It remains to be seen whether Mr. Price¡¯s crime drama cred and the show¡¯s impressive pedigree ¡ª Robert De Niro; his Tribeca Productions partner, Jane Rosenthal; and , a former detective with the New York Transit Police, are the other executive producers ¡ª will be enough to build a tough-minded police series that can thrive on CBS.
Networks love crime procedurals but have all but ceded gritty, character-driven cop shows to cable, where complex serials like ¡°The Shield¡± (FX) and especially ¡°The Wire¡± redefined audience expectations. Mr. Price acknowledged that writing commercial-break cliffhangers and negotiating narrative compromises with network executives took some getting used to: ¡°What I didn¡¯t want is a show where everybody is a hero every two seconds, and shots are fired every three seconds. I try as much as I can, given the mandates of a major network, to keep it quiet. And it¡¯s not easy.¡±
Mr. Simon said, ¡°If anybody can thread this needle and come out of network with something worthwhile, it¡¯s a guy like him.¡±
Mr. Price, who moved to Harlem from Gramercy Park in 2008, made the rapidly changing neighborhood an important element of the show, drawing creative fuel from its churning mix of longtime residents and gentrifiers, families and hoodlums, cultural landmarks and upstart bistros. ¡°The juxtapositions are just so wild around here,¡± he said recently in the third-floor library of his brownstone.
