CLEVELAND ¡ª The , a gleaming glass pyramid on the shore of Lake Erie, has become a proud symbol of this city. And Cleveland¡¯s rock fans turned out in droves for the hall¡¯s 27th induction ceremony on Saturday, only the third time it has been held here.
But this year much of the show¡¯s music was rooted squarely in the country¡¯s entertainment capitals of New York and Los Angeles. Guns N¡¯ Roses and the Red Hot Chili Peppers represented two branches of 1980s California rock: metal and punk. And the Beastie Boys and the mercurial songwriter Laura Nyro, if they have anything in common, were celebrated as but two slices of New York¡¯s huge multifaceted musical culture.
The ceremony, at the stately Public Auditorium ¡ª a 1920s Beaux-Arts monolith a few blocks from the museum ¡ª also honored Donovan; the blues guitarist Freddie King; the linked British invasion bands Small Faces and the Faces; the music executive Don Kirshner; and an array of backup groups.
And in between encomiums, blistering jams and shaggy-dog stories about rockers¡¯ early years, musicians spoke of cities as inspiration, common ground or hell.
¡°The opening riff of ¡®Welcome to the Jungle¡¯ is a descending trip into the underworld of Los Angeles,¡± said Billie Joe Armstrong of Green Day as he introduced Guns N¡¯ Roses. ¡°It was about the seedy underworld of misfits, drug addicts, paranoia, sex, violence, love and anger in the cracks of Hollywood.¡±
¡°It was a breath of fresh air,¡± he added, with a smirk.
Mike Diamond and Adam Horovitz of the Beastie Boys, only the third hip-hop act to make it into the hall, thanked New York as muse almost as many times as they thanked family members and business associates.
¡°Thank you, New York City, for basically raising us and giving us all the music we love and grew up on,¡± Mr. Diamond said, as he recalled the exhilaration of riding the subway and hearing ¡°punk rock, New Wave, salsa, soul ¡ª it was all there.¡±
Bette Midler, wiping away tears, portrayed Nyro, who died of cancer in 1997, as an earth mother of the Upper West Side and a chronicler of New York on an elevated poetic plane.
¡°She was the very essence of New York City,¡± Ms. Midler said. ¡°Not in the gritty, real sense but in the passionate, romantic, ethereal, maternal sense. She would take the most ordinary people in the most ordinary situations and spin them into heroic figures.¡±
As always, the night featured performances by seemingly as many rock stars as could fit on the stage at once. The Red Hot Chili Peppers played with Slash of Guns N¡¯ Roses, George Clinton of Parliament-Funkadelic and Ronnie Wood of the Faces and the Rolling Stones. For a Beastie Boys tribute, Kid Rock, Black Thought of the Roots and Travie McCoy of Gym Class Heroes rapped in old-school green Adidas jumpsuits.
No Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony would be complete without some backstage drama to underscore the raw feelings of the music (as well as the music industry¡¯s continual clash of millionaires). This year Axl Rose of Guns N¡¯ Roses , declaring in a that he would not attend and therefore would not reunite with his estranged band.
¡°I strongly request that I not be inducted in absentia,¡± Mr. Rose wrote, ¡°and please know that no one is authorized nor may anyone be permitted to accept any induction for me or speak on my behalf.¡±
The night was marked by other absences as well. Adam Yauch of the Beastie Boys, who has cancer, did not appear, and Rod Stewart, citing the flu, missed the chance to play with Mr. Wood, Kenney Jones and Ian McLagan in the Faces.
Many musicians made reference to the . Artists become eligible 25 years after the release of their first recording and are voted on by about 500 industry executives, journalists and previous winners.
Donovan, the Scottish-born singer of hits like ¡°Sunshine Superman¡± and ¡°Mellow Yellow,¡± called the award ¡°the grandest searchlight on my music that the world could ever beam.¡± But in reciting a nearly two-minute poem of thanks, he also seemed to hint at the politics behind the inductions.
¡°I thank you for this bright green laurel resting now upon my brow,¡± Donovan said. ¡°I thank you, goddess, and I thank you, muses, and I thank my fellow artists all.¡±
When the Rock Hall inductions began in 1986, it was a pantheon in need of a home. Most ceremonies ¡ª even after the museum in Cleveland opened in 1995 ¡ª have taken place at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York. But the organization says it plans to cycle the event through Cleveland every three years, a welcome move for the city¡¯s rock fans.
Cleveland had 10 days of events leading up to the inductions, including public concerts and the opening of the hall¡¯s new library and archives, a repository of documents and memorabilia by hundreds of musicians and industry figures.
After more than a quarter-century of enshrinements the hall of fame has begun to tie some of its more awkward loose ends. This year Smokey Robinson inducted players from six classic rock and soul groups whose more-famous frontmen had long since made the cut: James Brown¡¯s Famous Flames; Hank Ballard¡¯s Midnighters; Bill Haley¡¯s Comets; Buddy Holly¡¯s Crickets; Gene Vincent¡¯s Blue Caps; and Mr. Robinson¡¯s own group, the Miracles.
The hall was careful to identify those musicians officially as performers, not sidemen. But in his speech at the beginning of the night Jann Wenner, the founder of Rolling Stone and chairman of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Foundation, called them ¡°backup groups.¡±
¡°We overlooked you years ago when we first inducted your well-known leaders,¡± Mr. Wenner said. ¡°But we¡¯re very glad to have you in the Hall of Fame at last.¡±
