During the triumphant New York recital debut of the Italian soprano Anna Caterina Antonacci on Sunday afternoon at Alice Tully Hall, it was hard to keep from being a little upset with her. Here was a remarkable artist in her prime at 51, a musically intelligent and vocally splendid singer with a significant career in Europe who has been embraced by discerning maestros like Riccardo Muti.
Yet she has given few performances in the United States. This recital, with the American pianist Donald Sulzen, was her first appearance in New York since her debut here in an early-music program at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1999. At the end, along with all the ¡°bravas¡± from the audience, I wanted to shout, ¡°Where have you been?¡±
As Ms. Antonacci said in a in The New York Times, she did not avoid America. Her interests, she explained, led her to repertory that does not fit the template of a major international career. She began as a mezzo-soprano, refashioned herself as a soprano eight years ago and was best suited to Baroque and Classical works, especially Monteverdi, Gluck and Mozart. She has excelled in Rossini. In the last decade she has been delighted by the acclaim she received for her and the
But for nearly two hours on Sunday it was enough to bask in Ms. Antonacci¡¯s artistry. This was no diva showcase but a thoughtful program of French and Italian songs mostly from the Belle ?poque. Though this period saw the emergence of modernism, it also fostered a rich culture of salon music, the focus of Ms. Antonacci¡¯s program.
Looking lovely in a simple black dress, with some spike heels lending a touch of flair, Ms. Antonacci began with Faur¨¦¡¯s ¡°Cinq M¨¦lodies ¡®de Venice,¡¯?¡± five songs on Verlaine poems that evoke the sights and sounds of Venice. Her voice has a distinctive timbre: rich and warm yet focused and clear. She is comfortable at both ends of her range, whether cresting to soft, lingering high notes or dipping to dark, velvety lows.
But it is what she does with her voice that makes her such a riveting artist. In ¡°En Sourdine¡± (¡°Muted¡±), her singing found an uncanny balance between intense expressivity and magisterial elegance. She was equally refined in Faur¨¦¡¯s harmonically rich and lyrically alluring song group ¡°Horizon Chim¨¦rique.¡± In these works and the entire program Mr. Sulzen¡¯s playing was graceful and articulate.
Ms. Antonacci alternated the Faur¨¦ works with song sets by Reynaldo Hahn, the Venezuelan-born French composer, including selections from ¡°Venezia,¡± settings of poems in Venetian dialect. In Hahn¡¯s song ¡°La Barcheta¡± (¡°The Little Boat¡±), a man with love on his mind ushers the becoming Nineta onto a boat in the moonlight. Each verse ends with a yearning ¡°Ah!¡± As sung by Ms. Antonacci, these expressions were not milked for effect but seemed to be the subdued sounds of internalized desire seeping out.
In the second half, some little-heard, musically intricate songs by Cilea and Mascagni allowed Ms. Antonacci to draw on the full operatic dimensions of her penetrating voice. And in songs by Respighi her singing was a model of affecting refinement. There were vibrant songs by Tosti and, to end, a solemnly beautiful performance of Licinio Refice¡¯s 1935 song ¡°Ombra di Nube,¡± written for the soprano Claudia Muzio.
But it was all fun in the first encore, a sassy patter song by the zarzuela composer Ger¨®nimo Gim¨¦nez. After a lively song by Tosti, the audience wanted more. Ms. Antonacci ended with Faur¨¦¡¯s lilting ¡°Au Bord de l¡¯Eau.¡±
She has never performed in a staged in New York. Calling the Metropolitan Opera!
