At Joyce SoHo on Thursday, Sydney Skybetter¡¯s dancers looked attractive in the grays and blacks of Karen Young¡¯s tasteful costumes. Kate Ashton lighted them dimly from the side and below, casting their shadows on a wall. To music that was liturgical in sound if not in origin, the skilled dancers swirled prettily, stretching a leg behind them at hip level and rotating like turnstiles.
This handsome vision is a description not of one work but of any of the five on the 45-minute program from , each choreographed within the past three years. There¡¯s something to be said for stylistic consistency, exhibited here across two duets, a quartet and bookending dances for five. But a narrow range brought diminishing returns.
I was struck, for instance, by how two performers linked legs at the ankle. When that linkage recurred ¡ª in a different, ostensibly unrelated dance ¡ª it lost much of its charge. In ¡°The Laws of Falling Bodies¡± (2009), the opening work, the bodies continually going to the ground and clasping hands and dipping one another baptismally expressed a stricken community. But why did bodies fall so often in the other pieces?
In ¡°Temporary Matters¡± (2011) the dancers still looked stricken and socially skittish, but their jumps were wilder. These helped stir up the churning that¡¯s habitual in Mr. Skybetter¡¯s compositions, and the hint of recklessness was welcome in a program whose rhythms and repetitions verged on soporific.
¡°For Want of Sleep¡± was new, an insomniac duet for Kristen Arnold and Jennifer Jones. A commissioned score by cut the lulling, liturgical sound with buzzing and squeaking. The women started on the floor, one cradling the other, and got up only to keep spiraling back down and up again, restlessly. Ms. Arnold yawned a little, but the dance was too similar to the program¡¯s earlier duet, ¡°Near Abroad¡± (2008), in which two men rolled between nuzzling intimacy and yearning isolation.
In the final work, ¡°Little Boy,¡± also new, Mr. Skybetter appeared to be building on the lessons of ¡°Temporary Matters,¡± varying his dynamics, whipping things up. Its ending curiously echoed a moment in ¡°Falling Bodies,¡± two dancers kneeling reverently at the feet of their fellows. Thematically integrated into a longer work, such a rhyme might have resonance. Here it seemed like a piece from another puzzle, maybe one that hasn¡¯t yet been designed.
Mr. Skybetter formed his company in 2008, and he¡¯s still finding his voice. ¡°Little Boy¡± contained a wonderful little jump that swiveled in the air. I hope it doesn¡¯t get recycled in his next dance.
