NO day ever broke more thrillingly.
Out of the lowest depths of the orchestra, murmurs arise, daylight gathers in the brasses, and then, wham! The sun appears in full orchestral blaze. Dawn arrives in Richard Strauss¡¯s ¡°,¡± and so begins music¡¯s most vividly depicted mountainous ascent.
The symphony is the last and one of the least played of the Strauss tone poems. Its highly descriptive story of a climb up a mountain has struck some as a little too cinematic. Sniffy early listeners heard bloat and simplistic melodies and took note of the literal sound effects of a score that calls for cowbells and thunder and wind machines.
But for many Strauss fans this spectacular sonic depiction of an Alpine outing and its exhilarating climaxes are irresistible. And the naysayers overlook deeper meanings, including the exaltation of nature. ¡°It¡¯s actually about our spiritual existence,¡± the conductor Vladimir Ashkenazy said in a recent telephone interview.
New York audiences can take pleasure on both levels on Wednesday evening, but they will have to make a tough choice. Strikingly, ¡°An Alpine Symphony¡± is receiving two performances on the same night. It will be played by the under Mr. Ashkenazy, its music director, at Carnegie Hall and by the Juilliard Orchestra under Emmanuel Villaume at Avery Fisher Hall.
Not just audiences revel in the work. For conductors, Mr. Villaume said, also in a telephone interview, ¡°it¡¯s like being in a candy store.¡±
¡°You have everything for a conductor in the piece,¡± he added. ¡°The colors, mastering all these climaxes, mixing all these textures is absolutely fascinating and an exhilarating experience for a conductor. It¡¯s an absolute total masterpiece.¡±
The immense size of the orchestra required ¡ª the largest Strauss employed ¡ª keeps the performance count down most nights. He calls for four of each of the main woodwinds (including the rarely employed heckelphone, an oversized oboe); 8 horns, 4 trumpets, 4 trombones and 2 tubas; 16 additional brass players for a short offstage passage; 2 harps; celesta and organ; and a large percussion section.
Given the enormous resources demanded by the symphony it is no surprise that a student orchestra and a youth orchestra are taking it on: no need to pay overtime or hire lots of extras. ¡°We need a huge orchestra because all the kids want to play,¡± Mr. Ashkenazy said.
Strauss began sketching the piece in 1911. It had been almost a decade since his last major orchestral work, and, despite the sketches, Strauss had been dedicating himself to the lucrative composition of operas. But with his main opera librettist, Hugo von Hofmannsthal, absorbed into the military during World War I, he returned to the sketches. The ¡°Alpine Symphony¡± had its first performance in 1915, by the Dresden Court Orchestra in Berlin, under Strauss¡¯s baton.
The work had its roots in a boyhood mountain expedition but also in the work of Nietzsche: especially his attack on Christianity, ¡°The Antichrist,¡± a title that Strauss had considered for ¡°An Alpine Symphony.¡± In a 1911 diary entry he wrote that the symphony represented ¡°moral purification through one¡¯s own strength, liberation through work, worship of eternal, magnificent nature.¡± Inspiration was right outside his window. Strauss had a villa in Garmisch, in the Bavarian Alps.
The piece is divided into 22 seamless sections, each given a heading in the score by Strauss. It begins with ¡°Night,¡± a slow, mysterious passage containing a technically B flat minor chord that is also a cluster of nearly all the notes in the scale. ¡°Sunrise¡± bursts out in resplendent A major. The ¡°Ascent¡± is busy music, full of energy for a day¡¯s climb, with a deliberate quarter-note theme signifying the tramp up the mountain.
Hunting horns are heard offstage before the ¡°Entry Into the Woods,¡± in which the clarinet and flute sound birdcalls. Strings meander, and winds ripple in ¡°Wandering Along the Stream.¡± The hikers pass by a waterfall of downward harp and scales and see an apparition of a mountain spirit. Pastoral violin melodies fill the section ¡°In a Flowering Meadow.¡± Cowbells sound, and an oboe yodels in ¡°In the Alm,¡± which describes mountain pasture land. The ascent theme grows twisty in the section called ¡°Through Thicket and Underbrush the Wrong Way.¡±
And so forth, to the piece¡¯s big climax, ¡°At the Summit,¡± and through a storm, sunset and, finally, night again, with that disconcerting cluster. For Mr. Villaume the work¡¯s structure ¡ª modernist cluster, 19th-century tonality, back to modernist cluster ¡ª is Strauss¡¯s effort to hold the fort on an earlier style of composition, or even transform it for modern times, yet acknowledge the onrushing revolution that was embodied by Stravinsky¡¯s ¡°Rite of Spring.¡±
Because of the piece¡¯s strictly descriptive nature, it ¡°doesn¡¯t have that reputation as one of those major works of the human spirit and human genius,¡± Mr. Villaume said. ¡°There is something in it that appears decadent, over the top.¡±
But the music-as-painting moments should not be dismissed. ¡°They are absolutely extraordinary,¡± Mr. Villaume said. The pleasures of the climactic arrivals are visceral, especially the moment of reaching the mountaintop, when the orchestra plays all out.
¡°If there was a kitchen sink on the summit,¡± Mr. Villaume continued, ¡°it would be there.¡±
Yet, Mr. Villaume pointed out, Strauss goes further. A halting oboe melody emphasizes the fear of emptiness . Strauss extends the climactic moment in the ¡°Vision¡± section that immediately follows.
¡°You feel like time is totally being stretched, like you are in a dimension of ecstasy,¡± where the listener is in ¡°the middle of the explosion,¡± Mr. Villaume said. As an experiment in reconciling 19th- and 20th-century styles, he added, ¡°it¡¯s maybe a dead end, but a glorious one.¡±
