IN the 1970s and ¡¯80s Arthur Tress became well known for his strikingly surreal photographs. He staged odd situations ¡ª a man opening the trunk of his car and finding sleeping children; another man, naked, with his head in a bucket and a boot on his back ¡ª and caught them provocatively in the frame.
Many of these images were part of a retrospective of Mr. Tress¡¯s work at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington in 2001. Less in evidence was his early work, from the 1960s, partly because Mr. Tress himself had nearly forgotten that some of it existed.
Then in 2009, after his sister died, Mr. Tress was cleaning out her San Francisco house when he found a box of 25 mounted photographs from a show he had done in Sausalito, Calif., 45 years before. ¡°I was thrilled to find them again,¡± said Mr. Tress, now 71 and living in Cambria, Calif. At the time he still had the contact sheets buried in his archive but no prints of the images.
He took the photographs to James Ganz, a curator at the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco. ¡°It was one of those memorable moments in my career,¡± Mr. Ganz said. ¡°A light bulb went off, and I instantly knew this was significant work.¡± Mr. Ganz set about organizing ¡°Arthur Tress: San Francisco 1964,¡± a 70-work show now on view at the de Young Museum, part of the Fine Arts Museums, through June 3.
Taken when he was only 23, the images ¡ª mostly straightforward, documentary-style scenes, shot with a square-format Rolleiflex camera as he wandered the streets ¡ª show the influence of photographers like Robert Frank. ¡°There was an innocence in the work, and in the time,¡± Mr. Tress said. ¡°It was just before things got crazy in San Francisco.¡±
But he was already sowing the seeds of his later style. ¡°In these pictures he¡¯s doing things he¡¯s not even aware of,¡± Mr. Ganz said. ¡°His offbeat sensibility came through strongly in his later work, but it¡¯s already present here.¡±
Mr. Tress has his own phrase for the flavor of 1964, in his work and the world at large: ¡°an incipient strangeness.¡± Here, three images from that early series are paired with later works that show Mr. Tress¡¯s fantastical style in full bloom.
