Judging by his enjoyable concert at Carnegie Hall on Thursday evening, the Russian-American pianist has a genuine affinity for the music of Samuel Barber. In 2010 Mr. Anikushin performed a Barber concert in honor of that composer¡¯s centennial, and he is working on a disc of his music for Albany Records.
Mr. Anikushin was presented at Carnegie for an almost entirely Russian-speaking audience by the . The concert commemorated the in New York State, which is being celebrated with various events
Mr. Anikushin concluded his recital with a committed rendition of Barber¡¯s Piano Sonata in E-flat minor (Op. 26), a commission from the League of Composers to celebrate its 25th anniversary in 1950. Vladimir Horowitz, who performed the premiere, called it ¡°the first truly great native work¡± in the piano sonata form.
The piece meshes 12-tone techniques with Barber¡¯s trademark lyricism. Mr. Anikushin played with assurance and flair throughout, illuminating the dramatic rhythms and cinematic sweep of the first movement and imbuing the soulful third movement with a poetic spirit. For the concluding movement Barber filters Bach through a contemporary prism in a jazzy, syncopated , whose four voices were cleanly articulated by Mr. Anikushin¡¯s deft touch.
There was more Barber for the encores: characterful renditions of his ¡°Lullaby¡± and of ¡°Let¡¯s Sit it Out; I¡¯d Rather Watch: A Walls,¡± plus the .¡±
Befitting the occasion, Mr. Anikushin offered a work by a living Russian composer, Yekaterina Merkulyeva: her vivid ¡°Mirage,¡± written in 1991, shortly after she immigrated to New York. The piece segues between exuberant Prokofiev-like sections of rhythmic intensity and interludes of nostalgic introspection, reflecting the composer¡¯s conflicting emotions as a new immigrant.
There were also plenty of nostalgic moments in several works by Tchaikovsky, including (¡°Russian Rustic Scene¡±) and ¡°January¡± and ¡°May¡± from ¡°The Seasons,¡± all beautifully rendered by Mr. Anikushin¡¯s warm, fluid playing.
Works by Beethoven made up the first half of the program, starting with expressive renditions of the Polonaise in C and Andante Favori in F. Mr. Anikushin also offered a passionate, confident interpretation of Beethoven¡¯s popular ¡°Waldstein¡± Sonata.
