The artist-as-curator group show, once strictly a summer perennial, now blooms year round. For a springtime example see ¡°,¡± organized by Ugo Rondinone and on view now at both branches of the Gladstone Gallery, which is going head to head with Chelsea¡¯s high-season solos.
Mr. Rondinone does not have a signature style or medium. He has made sculptures of clowns and giant Easter Island type heads as well as paintings that look like window frames and blurry targets. His best-known work, and perhaps the clearest expression of his personality as an artist, is the joyous rainbow-striped sign reading, ¡°¡± that graced the New Museum facade at its 2007 opening.
Like that project ¡°The Spirit Level¡± taps psychic undercurrents and makes them highly visible. But the overall mood is darker, as befits our times. Much as Thomas Demand did last summer with his brooding, Magritte-inspired at Matthew Marks, Mr. Rondinone creates a deeply uncanny environment ¡ª the sort of show that changes the air in the gallery.
¡°The Spirit Level¡± resembles Mr. Demand¡¯s ¡°La Carte d¡¯Apr¨¨s Nature¡± in other ways too, for example in highlighting forgotten European artists: the Italian photographer Luigi Ghirri in Mr. Demand¡¯s case; the Swiss self-taught painter Hans Sch?rer, among many others, in Mr. Rondinone¡¯s. And it looks at artists in depth (as in albums rather than singles).
The show takes its title from the device used to ensure that paintings hang evenly on the wall, though its metaphysical wordplay is clear from the outset. Spectral Madonnas painted by Sch?rer (1927-97) guard the foyer of the gallery¡¯s 21st Street branch, closing ranks around the viewer.
Shaped like Russian nesting dolls, Sch?rer¡¯s Madonnas have masklike slits for eyes and, in some cases, broad grimaces made up of small pebbles. They are pan-spiritual, conjuring Mexican Day of the Dead figures, Egyptian mummies and Afro-Cuban deities.
Inside the main gallery strong gravitational forces are at work. Sam Gilliam¡¯s waterfalls of polypropylene fabric, lightly touched with acrylic paint in a rainbow of hues, cascade from the gallery¡¯s 24-foot-high rafters and from a place high up on the wall. Underfoot meanwhile is a scattering of oak leaves, actually made of paraffin-coated crepe paper, by Martin Boyce.
Negating the delicacy of those interventions are Peter Buggenhout¡¯s hulking sculptures of scrap metals and plastics, covered with a dense moss that turns out to be household dust. They¡¯re repulsive yet tantalizingly tactile, like Chamberlains caught up in a giant vacuum bag.
Just as messy is Kim Jones¡¯s ¡°Mudman Structure (large),¡± a wild-looking construction of twigs, twine, tape, wax and cheesecloth, the residue from Mr. Jones¡¯s performances under the nom de art Mudman. (He can be seen in action on Saturday at 1 p.m., walking back and forth between the gallery¡¯s two branches.)
Upstairs, on walls upholstered with gray burlap, Mr. Rondinone has orchestrated an unusual duet between the Fluxus artist Al Hansen (1927-95) and the Viennese Actionist Rudolf Schwarzkogler (1940-69). Mr. Hansen¡¯s Venuses, lovingly formed from cigarette butts and nested in wooden boxes and drawers, turn a carcinogen into a healing life force. They face Mr. Schwarzkogler¡¯s shocking acts of self-mutilation with razor blades, chronicled in black-and-white photographs.
The work at 24th Street is no less spellbinding, though the installation grows dense in places. Ann Craven¡¯s paintings of the moon, limned with spiraling strokes of a wide brush, hang in a central corridor. On the ground Latifa Echakhch¡¯s ¡°Frames¡± ¡ª the fringed borders of cut-up prayer rugs ¡ª overlap in various colorful configurations.
In the main room a phalanx of polymorphous, silver-glazed ceramic vessels by Andrew Lord guards Jay DeFeo¡¯s mystical charcoal renderings of shapes that could be chess pieces, hourglasses or bullets. Also here Saul Fletcher¡¯s Polaroids of hanging chairs, shoes and other objects occupy a fertile middle ground among drawing, sculpture and photography.
So do Amy Granat¡¯s botanical photograms, which turn a wall of the gallery into a lush black-and-white tapestry. Below them brass nudes by Hans Josephsohn recline on slabs (looking like lumpier versions of classical statuary).
Nearby, three four-foot-tall rubber-coated plaster phalluses cast from tree trunks by Sarah Lucas, an erstwhile Young British Artist, disrupt the idyllic atmosphere with their ribald wit and bright color. This half of the show could have used a few other formal and psychosexual disturbances to bring it into line with the works at 21st Street.
Altogether, though, ¡°The Spirit Level¡± is a garden of very unearthly delights and an excellent argument for extending the life cycle of the artist-organized group show.
