I¡¯d always heard that true character is revealed on the golf course. I just didn¡¯t know it could be revealed in my living room.
My friend Joy, who is in her early 40s, is a senior lawyer for a multinational finance company. She also enjoys golf and plays at courses around New York when she can fit it into her schedule.
Joy doesn¡¯t have much use for video games ¡ª and so she doesn¡¯t come to my place very often ¡ª but the other night she deigned to visit to play , the new golf game from Electronic Arts. As I told her, the big innovation in this year¡¯s edition is that the Xbox 360 version uses the Kinect sensor to track your movements as you mimic a golf swing. You don¡¯t even have to hold an electronic wand, ¨¤ la Nintendo¡¯s Wii controller or the Move add-on for Sony¡¯s PlayStation 3. With this game on Kinect you just stand in front of your television and put your best move on an imaginary ball at your feet.
That piqued her interest. On Monday evening we teed off on the back nine at Augusta National Golf Club, and every year. Because she¡¯s a high-powered corporate lawyer, she agreed to play me Skins Game-style, 10 (fictional) bucks a hole.
Now I have to point out that in the 24 years I¡¯ve known her, I have never seen Joy lose her temper. I¡¯m the volatile, emotional one, and she has always been the cool, calm and collected older sister figure in our relationship.
At least it was that way until I started taking her (fictional) money on the (fictional) golf course. You see, I hardly ever play real golf ¡ª and I¡¯ve never played with Joy ¡ª but I have been playing golf video games fairly seriously for about two decades now. In 1995 I even read ¡°Little Red Book¡± to help me understand course management when I was trying to master the tricky little course in Links Pro on a Macintosh.
And wouldn¡¯t you know, the Tiger Woods PGA Tour 13 seems to think I¡¯ve learned a thing or two about weight distribution, keeping my head down and behind the ball, making a full turn with the shoulders, turning over my wrists, squaring the club at impact, taking account of the lie, the wind, course conditions and a few other things about hitting a golf ball.
When I sank a gorgeous 22-foot downhill left-to-right slider to birdie the 16th hole and relieve Joy of 30 more (fictional!) dollars, I was shocked to realize that the steam seeming to come from her ears didn¡¯t seem fictional at all. The flush in her cheeks, the clench of her jaw, the piercing ire of her gaze, the hunch of her shoulders and, not least, the clipped, angry tone in her voice ¡ª those were all completely real.
About 20 minutes later, after I had hit my approach to the elevated 18th green to about 10 feet from the cup and made the putt to clean her out, Joy stormed out of my apartment in a huff. On the way out, she said, unkindly, ¡°You should try that on a real course.¡± I realized I was witnessing a genuine golf tantrum. I had heard and read about such a thing, but I had never seen one in person. (She later texted an apology.)
That¡¯s when I realized that if a golf video game could make a real golfer who never plays video games so upset, it must be doing something right. Joy had bought into the emotional illusion that we were playing golf for money on the back nine at Augusta.
There may be no video game that more genuinely tries to model a real-world physical activity; it even analyzes players¡¯ swing form. Obviously the game makes huge, unrealistic concessions to give players the fantasy that they can hit a ball hundreds of yards and have it end up pretty close to where they want it to go. Does the fact that a golf game allows a tyro like me to beat a real golfer like Joy make it bad? I hope not.
There are plenty of things that Tiger Woods PGA Tour 13 does poorly. Using Kinect to navigate the menus is a disaster. The system is so sensitive that when you¡¯re just walking around your living room between shots the game may think you¡¯re trying to change your club or stance. As you bend over to a side table for a potato chip or a sip of juice, it may occasionally think you¡¯re trying to take a horribly off-balance shot ¡ª potentially ruining several tense holes of action.
In addition to the Kinect the game gives players the choice of using the small thumbsticks on a console controller to evoke a shot. Electronic Arts made a terrible decision, however, in eliminating the decades-old option of tapping buttons to mimic a swing.
But the new Tiger Legacy mode is quite entertaining. You start as a toddler Tiger on national television, progress through his meteoric junior and amateur careers and press on to his spectacular professional success. (In the game¡¯s envisioned future he surpasses Jack Nicklaus¡¯s record 18 major victories later this decade.)
Most important, at the core task of transporting your psyche to a verdant green playscape somewhere in your mind, this new game succeeds completely.
Just ask Joy.
