Commercials for the release of James Cameron¡¯s 3-D version of ¡°Titanic¡± seem to be on a continuous loop as we approach the centennial of the ship¡¯s sinking (Saturday and Sunday). Mr. Cameron isn¡¯t the first of us, and won¡¯t be the last, to be obsessed with the ship¡¯s only voyage. In fact, one of the Miser¡¯s first Betamax recordings was of the 1953 ¡°Titanic,¡± starring Barbara Stanwyck and Clifton Webb. (The tape eventually broke from overuse.)
¡°The Titanic became a legend even in its own time,¡± said Sarah Henry, the chief curator of a new exhibition at the that explores the history of the public¡¯s fascination with the ship. The show, ¡°Titanic at 100: Myth and Memory,¡± offers a peek at some rare artifacts from the ship and its passengers, as well as a display of memorabilia from other exhibitions and films: the 1953 movie, as well as the very first, ¡°Saved From the Titanic,¡± starring Dorothy Gibson, a survivor who played herself, wearing the same dress she wore during her rescue. It was released less than a month after the sinking.
¡°It¡¯s tempting to say that the reason we¡¯re so fascinated with ¡®Titanic¡¯ is that James Cameron made the most expensive film ever made,¡± Ms. Henry said. ¡°But it was already true in 1912, and the interest never subsided.¡±
The Marconi wireless system ¡ª ¡°the Internet of its day,¡± Ms. Henry noted ¡ª allowed continuous publicity for the ship through transmissions to shore. The dispatches, including those that read ¡°we have struck an iceberg¡± and ¡°we are sinking,¡± will be on display, along with a longer series of transmissions that provides a timeline of the disaster. Costumes from the latest retelling, a television mini-series by Julian Fellowes (creator of ¡°Downton Abbey¡±), will hang like ghostly figures at the entrance. This ¡°Titanic,¡± which can be seen on ABC on Saturday and Sunday, focuses on the story of the ship¡¯s middle-class passengers, a group largely ignored in fictional accounts, Ms. Henry said. ¡°There¡¯s a lot that¡¯s still untold,¡± she added.
As for the Miser and others who would have been stuck in steerage, the museum¡¯s $5 admission price makes the show an ideal option for commemoration, as well as morbid fascination.
(Wednesdays through Sundays, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., through May 16; 12 Fulton Street, between Front and Water Streets, Lower Manhattan; 212-748-8600, .)

The time has come for this Miser to sail the open seas ¡ª or at least hit the open road ¡ª and leave New York. But not to worry, a new Miser, with plenty of ideas for low-cost entertainment, will start next week.
In the meantime, there¡¯s no better way to say goodbye than with a stroll around Greenwich Village and its Titanic-related sites. On Saturday at 1 p.m. and Sunday at noon, NYC Discovery Walking Tours will host visits to places associated with some of the ship¡¯s famous victims, like John J. Astor, as well as the Titanic Memorial Arch and the Seaman¡¯s Lodge, where survivors took shelter.
(For reservations and meeting place: 212-465-3331; $20.)
