GOSHEN, N.Y. ¡ª As Modernist buildings reach middle age, many of the stark structures that once represented the architectural vanguard are showing signs of wear, setting off debates around the country between preservationists, who see them as historic landmarks, and the many people who just see them as eyesores.
The conflict has come in recent months to this quaint village 60 miles north of New York City ¡ª with its historic harness-racing track, picturesque Main Street and Greek Revival, Federal and Victorian houses ¡ª where the blocky concrete county government center designed by the celebrated Modernist architect Paul Rudolph has always been something of a misfit.
¡°I just don¡¯t think it fits with the character of the county seat and the village of Goshen,¡± said Leigh Benton, an Orange County legislator who grew up in the area. ¡°I just thought it was a big ugly building.¡±
Completed in 1967, the building has long been plagued by a leaky roof and faulty ventilation system and, more recently, by mold; it was closed last year after it was damaged by storms, including Tropical Storm Irene.
Edward A. Diana, the Orange County executive, wants to demolish it, an idea that has delighted many residents but alarmed preservationists, local and national, who say the building should be saved. The county legislature is expected to decide whether to demolish or renovate it next month.
Those who want to save it call it a prime example of an architectural style called Brutalism that rejected efforts to prettify buildings in favor of displaying the raw power of simple forms and undisguised building materials, like the center¡¯s textured facade.
¡°Preservation is not simply about saving the most beautiful things,¡±?said Mark Wigley, the dean of .?¡°It¡¯s about saving those objects that are an important part of our history and whose value is always going to be a subject of debate.¡±
A similar debate is going on in Chicago, where preservationists have been fighting to save Prentice Women¡¯s Hospital, a concrete, cloverleaf-shaped 1974 structure designed by Bertrand Goldberg that the has placed on its endangered list. In New Haven, the 1972 Veterans Memorial Coliseum despite a campaign to rescue it.
In Manhattan, 2 Columbus Circle, the 1964 ¡°lollipop¡± building by Edward Durell Stone, escaped demolition but in a way that stripped away its original facade.
Preserving charming confections from the 18th- and 19th-century can be a struggle; convincing people to keep more recent, decidedly uncute structures built from 1950 into the 1970s can be a battle of an entirely higher magnitude, especially if they¡¯ve sprung leaks.
¡°The phenomenon of a building that¡¯s about 30 to 40 years old being severely out of style and leading to people wanting to alter it or demolish it is very real,¡± said Frank Sanchis, the director of United States programs at the about the Orange County Government Center here. The fund put the Goshen building on its 2012 watch list.
Opinions are even stronger when it comes to Brutalism, a style closely associated with the Swiss architect Le Corbusier, and one that tends to produce weighty monoliths like the in Washington and
In an interview Theodore Dalrymple, a fellow at the Manhattan Institute who has written about the architecture of Le Corbusier, described Brutalist buildings as ¡°absolutely hideous, like scouring pads on the retina.¡±
¡°One of those buildings can destroy an entire cityscape that has been built up over hundreds of years,¡± he said.
Barry Bergdoll, the chief curator of architecture and design at the Museum of Modern Art, said: ¡°Brutalism was supposed to bring back all sorts of things like craft ¡ª the concrete wasn¡¯t smooth, you could feel the hand of the worker there. But it was perceived in almost the exact opposite way. It¡¯s one of the great public relations failures of all time. Most people think of Brutalist architecture literally ¡ª as aggressive, heavy, boding and forbidding.¡±
Rudolph, was a prominent Modernist architect who also designed Yale¡¯s , among others. Architectural historians say the Goshen government center, which features protruding cubes and a corrugated concrete facade resembling corduroy, represents Rudolph at his best.
¡°I would easily identify this as one of his top 10,¡± said Sean Khorsandi, a director of the .
But Mr. Benton, the county legislator, called it ¡°a world monument to inefficiency.¡± Each camp has its own estimate for how much it will cost to renovate the center ¡ª the preservation side says about $35 million, the county says $65 million. For an additional $20 million, county officials say, they would be able to build a new center (probably traditional) and to improve several other county buildings. The government offices that were in the center have dispersed around the county.
