There is a longstanding tradition of artists reading other artists¡¯ work against the grain: viewing or interpreting it in a way that was clearly not intended. A famous example is , the French sculptor, who was inspired by Michelangelo¡¯s unfinished works, specifically sculptural fragments of torsos and limbs and the ¡°Slaves¡± originally planned for the tomb of Pope Julius II. Working in the same era as the Impressionists, whose canvases were often criticized as looking like unfinished sketches, Rodin took the idea of figures still partly encased in stone and translated it into sculpture that looked distinctly modern.
Now Rachel Kneebone, a British artist, has been invited by the to riff on Rodin. For ¡°Regarding Rodin,¡± Ms. Kneebone chose 15 works from the museum¡¯s permanent collection to show alongside her own exquisitely created objects, which were sculptured in porcelain and fired in a kiln in her studio. That Ms. Kneebone¡¯s project is installed in the museum¡¯s Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art might suggest that you¡¯re going to get a feminist flogging of Rodin, perhaps a bit of sisterly retribution for his affair in the 1880s and ¡¯90s with Camille Claudel, a much younger sculptor, who ended her years in a mental institution. But Ms. Kneebone does not head down that path.
Where Rodin took cues from Michelangelo¡¯s unfinished works, Ms. Kneebone is drawn to Rodin¡¯s maquettes, or the smaller models on which larger sculptures were based. A particularly fertile one is Rodin¡¯s ¡°Burghers of Calais, First Maquette¡± (1884), a bronze model for a public sculpture that commemorated an episode of French heroism during the Hundred Years War between England and France in the 14th and 15th centuries.
In works like ¡°Blind Convulsion¡± (2009) and ¡°When I doubt I exist again¡± (2009), Ms. Kneebone ignores the historical implications of that Rodin sculpture and focuses on the base in his maquette, which looks like a miniature version of an architectural entablature, and the gentle encircling of bodies above.
In her works, however, the bodies become tangled, writhing masses: an orgy of legs and torsos whose heads occasionally resolve into elongated shapes resembling squid or nautiluses. Those familiar with the sculptures of the British artists Jake and Dinos Chapman, which also rely on masses of sexualized figures, will see some overlap, although Ms. Kneebone¡¯s bone-white sculptures are self-consciously decorative. They recall wedding cakes and Baroque or Rococo fountains ¡ª as well as the rich tradition of British ceramics, reaching back to colonial trade with China ¡ª and seem to celebrate sensuality and sexuality rather than treating the human body as abject, uncanny or morbid.
A couple of her sculptures, like ¡°Mine heart is turned within me¡± (2010) ¡ª many of the titles come from the poet Rainer Maria Rilke, who served for a time as Rodin¡¯s secretary ¡ª feature a faceless female figure whose nude body is draped in a cloaklike sheet of porcelain and perched on a base resembling an entablature or, in ¡°Eyes that look close at wounds themselves are wounded¡± (2010), an elaborately decorated cake. In these works the figures¡¯ genitalia are exaggerated into mollusk shapes or emit flowing ribbons of porcelain.
It¡¯s in these formal elements that you see distinct echoes of classical 1970s feminist art. All you have to do is round the corner into the permanent installation of Judy Chicago¡¯s ¡° (1974-79), the Sackler Center¡¯s foundational work, and gaze down at porcelain dinner plates featuring abstract forms resembling vulvas and vaginas. (The place settings for Georgia O¡¯Keeffe, Virginia Woolf and the ¡°Primordial Goddess,¡± at the entrance to the installation, seem particularly apropos.)
Ms. Chicago¡¯s work ¡ª created in collaboration with dozens of other women, although it unfortunately sticks with the old-school version of single attribution and authorship ¡ª celebrates traditional ¡°women¡¯s work¡± in its materials and execution: sewing, embroidery, ceramics. It also highlights early second-wave feminist ideas of essentialist femininity: hence the references to ¡°the¡± goddess, and other female archetypes.
You could draw parallels in Ms. Kneebone¡¯s work: where Rodin excelled at the muscular and masculine, Ms. Kneebone is drawn to the delicate and diminutive. But for the most part such stereotypical feminine references are erased; Ms. Kneebone (who was born in 1973), seems very much an artist of a post-feminist era, who takes what she likes from art history and leaves hard-core critique for other artists.
Even the chef d¡¯oeuvre of the show, ¡°The Descent¡± (2008), which recalls Rodin¡¯s ¡°¡± ¡ª which, in turn, was inspired by Dante¡¯s ¡°Inferno¡± ¡ª feels more like a poetic celebration of flesh and the sculptural medium than anything else. Comprising dozens of little figures descending into a cauldron-shaped pit, the sculpture, viewed by stepping up on a narrow wooden platform encircling it, is nearly 11 &frac12; feet in diameter.
What you¡¯re struck by, in addition to the cleverness of the design and the proximity to a lot of fragile, fired porcelain, is the sheer energy that went into the making of the work ¡ª just as you are with Rodin¡¯s ¡°Gates,¡± which included over 200 figures and groupings but was never fully realized during his lifetime.
You also sense the connection between sculptors working at the height of their talent on enormous projects. Some, like Ms. Kneebone, finish them. Others, like Michelangelo, or Rodin with his ¡°Gates,¡± don¡¯t. But that doesn¡¯t necessarily affect how they influence subsequent generations, or the unexpected ways they might inspire them.
