The emblematic tune in Yosvany Terry¡¯s early set at the Jazz Standard on Wednesday night was the closer, ¡°Summer Relief,¡± a slippery bit of cultural cross talk. It began with a Yoruba chant by the conga player Pedro Mart¨ªnez, in a call-and-response with the band. A groove materialized, in irregular polyrhythm, and then came a coiled melody assigned to Michael Rodriguez on trumpet and Mr. Terry on alto saxophone.
Moments later the ground shifted again, to a crisp quintuple meter, and again, into headlong 4/4 swing: the rude and righteous pulse of New York hard bop, negotiated on its own terms. That added up to a lot of built-in convolutions for the first minute and a half of a song, though the ensemble made it feel bound by logic and bodily intuition.
Mr. Terry, a Cuban-born, conservatory-trained musician who moved to New York in 1999, has centered his career on such multilevel fluencies. In recent years, along with a few other bandleaders of similar background, he has helped reframe the sound of Afro-Cuban jazz in New York, reaching for a flexibly cerebral, harmonically advanced and culturally resonant kind of fusion. ¡°Metamorphosis¡± (Ewe), his 2005 debut album, announced with a first-rate assembled crew.
¡°Summer Relief¡± opens his superior sophomore album, ¡°Today¡¯s Opinion¡± (Criss Cross), featuring the same working band that played this week¡¯s engagement: Mr. Terry, Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Mart¨ªnez, with Osmany Paredes on piano, Obed Calvaire on drums and Yunior Terry, Mr. Terry¡¯s brother, on bass. (The group was billed at the Jazz Standard as a quintet, with Mr. Mart¨ªnez as a featured guest.)
In performance and on record, the band¡¯s established rapport makes a difference, rounding out the sharp-cornered complexities of Mr. Terry¡¯s writing and giving the music a visceral punch.
There¡¯s a lot rattling around in that music, some of it unexpected. ¡°Inner Speech¡± suggested the distant call of Wynton Marsalis¡¯s first acclaimed quintet. (Mr. Rodriguez made himself at home there, starting his solo in a murmur and gradually brightening and quickening his attack.)
¡°Returning Home,¡± a ballad with Mr. Terry on soprano saxophone, genuflected in the direction of Wayne Shorter. And ¡°Contrapuntistico,¡± a miniature opus, had a winding melodic line, harmonized at tight intervals, with rhythm-section tension; it also featured a bracing improvisation by Mr. Paredes and a pugnacious back-and-forth between Mr. Terry and Mr. Rodriguez.
Over the past few years that same frontline has been featured in a quintet led by Gonzalo Rubalcaba, the brilliant Cuban pianist, bandleader and composer. Wednesday¡¯s set began with the same tune that opens ¡°Avatar,¡± Mr. Rubalcaba¡¯s 2008 Blue Note album: a loosely funky concoction that phases in and out of tempo with shadowy grace.
Mr. Terry composed that tune, and he seemed to be reclaiming it here, issuing a reminder that for all the good he has gleaned from his apprenticeship with Mr. Rubalcaba, he has contributed something too.
