LONDON ¡ª In England, on Maundy Thursday various customs still pertain. (The monarch still distributes ¡°Maundy money¡± to deserving pensioners.) It immediately precedes Good Friday, a public holiday, on which theaters are traditionally closed.
The Royal Ballet at Covent Garden celebrated Maundy Thursday with two world premieres, in one of which an expletive recurred in sung lyrics as high-prestige pop-rock artists performed onstage and dancers wore radical-chic couture. In the other, set in late-Victorian and Edwardian London, copulation was depicted repeatedly, two female characters were shown having their throats slit at the end of sex, and a third was institutionalized as insane. The male characters included a prime minister, a member of the royal family, a celebrated painter and Jack the Ripper.
Probably no member of the Covent Garden audience was shocked. Both ballets were loudly cheered, both had obvious merits, and there are plenty of local choreographic precedents, for each belongs to a well-established local genre. It made a bizarre end to Lent ¡ª but never mind.
The premieres, by Wayne McGregor and Liam Scarlett, joined Christopher Wheeldon¡¯s ¡°Polyphonia¡± (2001) to compose a triple bill of 21st-century ballets by young British choreographers. Since all three men work internationally and are variously connected to the Covent Garden company, the audience had cause for pride and excitement. True, Mr. Wheeldon made ¡°¡± for New York City Ballet. But the Royal Ballet has an even longer record of presenting his works on its main stage than City Ballet, going back to 1996.
Thursday¡¯s performance of ¡°Polyphonia,¡± led by Leanne Benjamin, Yuhui Choe and Beatriz Stix-Brunell, was admirable; Mark Stanley¡¯s lighting makes the ballet¡¯s spatial organization look even more remarkable than it does in New York.
Although Mr. McGregor, from a modern-dance background, is the eldest of the three, he¡¯s the most modish dance-maker now on the world¡¯s ballet scene. He made his first work for the Royal in 2006, soon afterward he was appointed its resident choreographer and brings the obvious frissons of involving this classical-ballet company in modern movement, modern music and modern design. (His ballets have joined several American repertories. He created a piece for City Ballet in 2010, and has made new works for the Paris Opera Ballet and other European companies.)
For ¡°Carbon Life,¡± his Maundy Thursday premiere, he had music by Mark Ronson and Andrew Wyatt, with Adam Chetwood and Mr. Ronson on guitar; the singers Boy George, Hero Fisher, Alison Mosshart, Jonathan Pierce and Mr. Wyatt; and the rapper Black Cobain at the back of the stage. Meanwhile, his dancers wore a series of black or white, or both, costumes by the fashion designer Gareth Pugh, ranging from tight underwear to tutus, ruffs, thigh-high boots and witch-style pointed hats. Black-grid d¨¦cor occasionally rose and fell between musicians and dancers.
Everything was showily chic, nothing more so than the choreography. Both solos and partnering made much of hyperextension. Edward Watson ¡ª the Royal¡¯s most poorly aligned principal in terms of classical placement, especially head positions ¡ª came into his own here, with legs rearing behind him way above his head. In a pas de deux with Steven McRae, Sarah Lamb¡¯s torso and legs passed calmly through eye-baffling contortions.
The isolations of various body parts, the sequences of attention-grabbing gestures, an extravagant kiss, little bouts of same-sex coupling, unisex costuming and male point work were all emphatically delivered; all proved vacuously enjoyable. One foursome looked like three men and a woman for a remarkably long time until it turned out to be two men and two women; it made no difference.
As a coherent view of human energy, Mr. McGregor¡¯s choreography is without interest. As a series of wow effects, however, it¡¯s frothily charming ¡ª and intensely reminiscent of the amalgam of rock classicism and avant-garde fashion that the British choreographer Michael Clark (currently working with the musician Jarvis Cocker at the Whitney Museum in New York) developed in the mid-1980s. Everything says, ¡°Get this!¡± ¡°Carbon Life¡± is the latest display of Cool Britannia. I have seen nothing more sheerly pretty from Mr. McGregor than the fast-whirling lift with which one couple leaves the stage.
Whereas that ballet succeeded entirely on its own harmlessly lightweight terms, Mr. Scarlett¡¯s ¡°Sweet Violets¡± was an experience at once far more flawed and far more substantial. It¡¯s an extended one-act essay in the genre of historical sex-and-violence drama, well known to the Covent Garden audience from works like Kenneth MacMillan¡¯s (1978). Its subject is the connections between sex, violence and murder in Victorian days.
