WHEN Ilana Glazer and Abbi Jacobson met for lunch at Cafe Cluny in the West Village recently, they looked tanner than usual. Ms. Glazer had taken up biking: ¡°It¡¯s my new thing,¡± she said.
None of this was totally unrelated to the month they¡¯d just spent in Los Angeles. These creators of ¡°,¡± a Web series with devoted followings among women and New Yorkers ¡ª and a rabid following among certain female New Yorkers, including influential comedians ¡ª were on the West Coast to meet with producers and executives at FX, the cable channel for which they are currently developing a script for a potential ¡°Broad City¡± pilot.
So were the biking and the sun-kissed skin signs that Ms. Glazer and Ms. Jacobson were preparing to move and to shoot their potential pilot on Hollywood¡¯s synthetic-Manhattan sets?
Ms. Glazer shook her head of brown curls. ¡°It¡¯s got to be here, that was in our pitch,¡± she said. ¡°We made it for no money here. Who could argue with that?¡± Ms. Jacobson (she of the brown straight hair) began her response with a few profanities and ended with an emphatic no.
There it was: the quintessential New-York-or-die perspective that defines ¡°Broad City,¡± in which Ms. Jacobson and Ms. Glazer play friends who embrace, duck and battle the oddities of young urban life. The shorts, two to seven minutes long, cover phenomena peculiar to New York (pursuing a guy purely for his in-unit washer and dryer) and universal to young women (the insufferable experience of hanging out with ultra-beautiful women).
The show in 2010, and its two seasons convey the kind of authentic 20-something flavor that network executives spend enormous energy to concoct. After churning out half a dozen this year, the industry finally seems ready to give the duo¡¯s screen-ready work a shot. Whether it can find a home, especially in the wake of the starting Sunday on HBO, remains a question.
¡°We try not to get our expectations up too much,¡± said Ms. Jacobson, who, along with Ms. Glazer, is awaiting FX¡¯s notes on the pilot script. ¡°But at the same time we know it¡¯s a really good product.¡±
Ms. Jacobson, 28, and Ms. Glazer, 25, are passionate, funny and sometimes raunchy. But when it comes to the work of comedy, they¡¯re the equivalent of straight-A students. They did their research (by living the bewildering lives of transplant New Yorkers) studied hard (at the theater, where they met on an improv team) and turned in neat work (every episode is professional quality and bookended with crisp credit sequences). But their vignettes were never the stuff of instant, Web-to-TV star-making deals. They are subtle and wry ¡ª not as dialogue heavy as ¡°Girls¡± and not drenched in shock value either ¡ª and some still draw online views.
So in 2011 Ms. Jacobson and Ms. Glazer set out to produce their own pilot. But they ran into money problems when a Kickstarter crowd-sourced fund-raising campaign . ¡°It was bad,¡± Ms. Glazer said.
They decided, with the help of a manager, to pitch their show to networks, but meanwhile ran into a setback on the finale of the Web series. The actress Kristen Schaal was set to make a guest appearance but had to pull out because of a scheduling conflict. Ms. Jacobson and Ms. Glazer resigned themselves to going ahead without a star cameo. ¡°I had been taking off work all these days, like, ¡®Sorry, I have to live my dreams,¡¯?¡± Ms. Glazer said. (They have since turned full time to writing and producing.)
But they didn¡¯t give up trying for a name guest and through an Upright Citizens Brigade contact sought out Amy Poehler, one of the founders of the theater. It was more of a ¡°?¡®would she ever do this?¡¯ than a ¡®will she do this?¡¯?¡± Ms. Jacobson said.
The next day the contact relayed Ms. Poehler¡¯s written response: ¡°Sure! I love ¡®Broad City.¡¯?¡± Ms. Glazer and Ms. Jacobson can still hardly put that part into words without getting, as Ms. Glazer said, ¡°verklempt.¡± She added, ¡°I felt like I would fall to my knees.¡± They had no idea Ms. Poehler had even seen their series.
But she had. ¡°I knew of Abbi and Ilana from their work at¡± Upright Citizens Brigade, Ms. Poehler wrote in an e-mail. ¡°They¡¯re knuckleheads who aren¡¯t afraid to look ridiculous. I love that ¡®Broad City¡¯ feels like a true New York show, and reminds us that men aren¡¯t the only ones who are adolescent and adrift.¡±
Days later Ms. Poehler showed up to the Barrow Street set. She shook hands with Ms. Glazer¡¯s dad and gamely rolled around on the sidewalk amid spilled oranges. (After the schedule was changed for Ms. Poehler, Ms. Schaal was able to rejoin the shoot ¡ª so included both.)
Seven months later Ms. Poehler came aboard as the FX project¡¯s executive producer. ¡°There¡¯s a scene in the Web series finale where we¡¯re running, and then Amy comes and joins us,¡± Ms. Jacobson said. ¡°And that¡¯s what it feels like now.¡±
If the FX series goes forward, the pair will face two disadvantages; not only would they arrive at the end of a string of female-centered comedies, but they would also be doing so on a historically .
Yet they¡¯ve also got an entry in the advantage column: Ms. Glazer and Ms. Jacobson have been refining the show¡¯s voice for nearly two years. What started as a two-minute clip of asking a homeless man for change grew into an anthology with chapters on female empowerment, sexuality and embracing, rather than postponing or dreading, adulthood. All of it mirrored the ways Ms. Jacobson and Ms. Glazer were evolving.
¡°I¡¯ve been in New York almost seven years now,¡± Ms. Glazer said. ¡°The thing I feel luckiest about is that I had this project to help me define myself. I have no idea where I¡¯d be without it.¡±
But, again, probably not Los Angeles.
