In the work of zoe | juniper, the Seattle-based husband-and-wife team of the choreographer Zoe Scofield and the video artist Juniper Shuey, dance design and video design are on unusually intimate terms. The sophisticated layering that can result is especially evident in ¡°A Crack in Everything,¡± which had its local debut at New York Live Arts on Wednesday. But piling on layers doesn¡¯t guarantee depth.
The stage is blocked by an ivy-covered wall, or, rather, the video image of one on a stage-spanning scrim. As the action starts, the scrim turns translucent enough that we can see dancers behind it. They are soon joined by images of themselves on the screen: afterimages, memories, visions of the future.
The device is fairly common, but it¡¯s handled here with rare skill.
There¡¯s another scrim across the rear of the stage that also hosts images, and sometimes a dancer¡¯s double is a live person made ghostly by the screens. The line between the physical world and the image world blurs.That the blurring is also a folding of time is suggested by how some dancers face forward and some face away.
Ms. Scofield makes fine use of the full stage, not just front and back but also the lateral edges. But it¡¯s a little crude and ultimately wearying how every episode has to end in a blackout or a blinding flash dividing before from after. And having a dancer trace her own moving outline on the front scrim is too obvious a representation of the futility of capturing time¡¯s flow. But the play with time is generally evocative and subtle.
¡°A Crack in Everything,¡± however, is going for more than that. The directors¡¯ note in the program speaks of ¡°mythologizing.¡± Erik Andor¡¯s costumes shine with patches of gold foil that make the dancers look semidivine but also like Almond Roca candies that someone hasn¡¯t finished unwrapping. (The foil in the women¡¯s hair, molded to swoop upward, makes them gilded brides of Frankenstein.)
The aesthetic, in other words, risks being risible. I found it so, even before two of the dancers strip naked and bark at each other.
At several points, the dancers hold in their mouths red thread that extends into the wings, tethering them, marking their progress across the stage in a most visceral fashion. It recalls the red ribbon that Medea stuffs into her mouth in Martha Graham¡¯s ¡°Cave of the Heart,¡± only here the thread turns out to be connected to a hooded figure. Could this figure be Fate? Later the character keeps erasing the progress of three women traveling from one wing to the other, picking them up and setting them back.
If some of the work¡¯s portentous theatricality evokes Graham, the transfiguration that Ms. Scofield seems to be shooting for is Twyla Tharp¡¯s. The music keeps swelling, but although Ms. Scofield has excellent dancers ¡ª especially Raja Feather Kelly and the diminutive powerhouse Anna Sch?n ¡ª her vocabulary, with its slinky level-shifting and head-rolling, can¡¯t quite express transcendence. All she can do at the end is pull the plug.
