The young choreographer Avi Scher likes to say that he has a mission: presenting top-quality ballet dancers in intimate spaces at affordable prices. On Saturday at the Alvin Ailey Citigroup Theater, all elements of that formula were in place, including Herman Cornejo of American Ballet Theater. But so was the final, fatal ingredient: Mr. Scher¡¯s choreography.
The treat of seeing an artist of Mr. Cornejo¡¯s caliber at close range was canceled out by the frustration of seeing his gifts wasted. For the dance ¡°Phased,¡± the guitarist Nate Brown played Villa-Lobos, but the pleasures of live music were vitiated by a choreographic response that didn¡¯t go much beyond some Spanish posturing for Mr. Cornejo, a ballet star from Argentina.
A duet with the lovely Misa Kuranaga of the Boston Ballet, ¡°Phased¡± was typical of Mr. Scher¡¯s emotional incoherence. For no apparent reason Ms. Kuranaga kept curling up on the floor like a pill bug; Mr. Cornejo, forlorn one minute and flirtatious the next, picked her up each time, though sometimes she had to wait for him to leap around a bit first.
In another duet, ¡°The Gift,¡± the scenario was clear yet curious. Derrick Agnoletti, a chiseled and articulate dancer from the Joffrey Ballet, fell in love with a purple scarf that the sweet Laura Feig also coveted. Mr. Agnoletti gave it to her, but in the conventional partnering that ensued, both dancers paused to telegraph that something was amiss.
Eventually, Ms. Feig relinquished the scarf, walking away as Mr. Agnoletti knelt in ecstasy. I took the piece as camp until I read its epigraph in the program: ¡°The best gift is acceptance.¡± Might ¡°The Gift¡± be an allegory for coming out?
The final premiere, ¡°Dwindle,¡± was an ensemble work for six women and three men. The extra bodies did Mr. Scher good, and his arrangement of them made the most musical sense of the evening. The tonal shifts were as clunky as ever, but Mr. Scher worked his ballet clich¨¦s ¡ª the man wandering in a forest of girls ¡ª to better effect. And a duet for Carlos Lopez and Sean Stewart had real rhythmic intricacy and drive, the only moment in the program I wanted to see more of.
Before the performance began and again during the intermission, Mr. Scher showed us Mr. Cornejo and Ms. Kuranaga practicing. Up close and personal: that¡¯s what he¡¯s selling. But these moments, like the show around them, were just another tease. This is Mr. Scher¡¯s third New York season, and each year he has delivered new stars, new lures. At 28 he¡¯s still very young for a ballet choreographer. But you can only tease so many times before people stop paying attention.
