In what amounts to late middle age in television the CBS comedy ¡°How I Met Your Mother¡± suddenly finds itself a hit.
Seven years into its run this well-regarded series, which returns with a new episode on Monday night, is scoring its best ratings. It is up almost 20 percent this season among the audience that advertisers most want to reach, viewers between the ages of 18 and 49, and now ranks as the No. 8 entertainment show in that category.
Beyond giving comfort to late bloomers everywhere, the performance by ¡°How I Met Your Mother¡± is proving that the new ways to watch television can sometimes enhance the old ways. Two factors changed the trajectory of the show this year: its early seasons became available on Netflix, and repeats began running on FX, a cable channel with an audience especially well matched to the show¡¯s core viewership.
¡°It¡¯s very unscientific,¡± said Craig Thomas, who created ¡°How I Met Your Mother,¡± with Carter Bays, ¡°but people have told us: ¡®I always heard your show was good. I caught up, and now I watch it live on TV.¡¯?¡±
Mr. Bays, added, ¡°What I heard anecdotally was that a lot of people went to Netflix and just devoured the first seasons of the show.¡± Both men spoke by telephone from their offices in Los Angeles.
At about the same time Netflix picked up the series, 20th Century Fox Television, the studio that produces and owns the show, revised a deal that originally sold its repeats to the Lifetime channel and also made them available on the more compatible FX. (Both the studio and FX are owned by News Corporation.) ¡°That really pumped up awareness of the show,¡± said Gary Newman, chairman of 20th Century Fox Television.
FX ran a marathon of the series over Labor Day weekend, another invitation for viewers who had heard good word of mouth. The results for the new season on CBS were spectacular, with viewership up 30 percent for episodes in September. By contrast several shows introduced about the same time as ¡°How I Met Your Mother¡± ¡ª including ¡°Desperate Housewives,¡± ¡°House¡± and ¡°The Office¡± ¡ª have seen their ratings erode in later seasons.
All of this was especially important to ¡°How I Met Your Mother¡± because it is a television rarity: a completely serialized sitcom. The show¡¯s premise revolves around a father in the year 2030 recounting for his children the circuitous, obstacle-strewn course of true love that led him to marry their mother.
In the past, when repeats of popular shows became widely available in syndication, they often contributed ¡ª with a few exceptions like ¡°Seinfeld¡± ¡ª to a decline for the original episodes, an effect of overexposure. Now that trend seems to be reversing.
Another example is ¡°The Big Bang Theory.¡± That hit CBS comedy has also reached new ratings heights ¡ª up 27 percent over last year ¡ª coinciding with the introduction of repeats on TBS. And those repeats have lifted TBS to the top of the ratings among cable channels.
¡°When audiences for successful series on networks are a little bit smaller, getting onto another platform and exposing a show to other viewers brings new people to the original broadcasts,¡± Mr. Newman said, adding later, ¡°With all the choices people have now, it just takes longer for a show to break through.¡±
Brad Adgate, the director of research for Horizon Media, a firm that buys commercial time for advertisers, noted that sitcoms had a history of success in syndication, breeding continued success in first run.?¡°?¡®Seinfeld,¡¯ ¡®Friends¡¯ or ¡®Everybody Loves Raymond¡¯ have thrived,¡± Mr. Adgate said in an e-mail. ?But he added,?¡°With the emergence of DVRs and streaming video, ¡®HIMYM¡¯?¡± ¡ª as ¡°How I Met Your Mother¡± is often called ¡ª ¡°and ¡®Big Bang¡¯ could be the end of an era.¡± He noted that TBS opted not to bid on the rights for television¡¯s biggest sitcom, ¡°Modern Family,¡± which will be broadcast on USA instead. ¡°Comedy¡¯s popularity in playback and streaming video may have diminished its value. Time will tell.¡±
It took a while for ¡°How I Met Your Mother¡± to find a first-run audience. The show survived a rocky period for sitcoms after its premiere in 2005.
