The excitement of Las Vegas and the sophistication of Manhattan merged on Tuesday evening at Caf¨¦ Carlyle, where Clint Holmes¡¯s stirring new show, ¡°This Thing Called Love,¡± saluted the songs of Cole Porter and Paul Simon. What do these composers have in common? Not much when you think about it. Mr. Simon¡¯s knotty reflections with their undertone of whimsy and Porter¡¯s besotted romanticism are poles apart.
But Mr. Holmes, imagining a dialogue between the two, created a dramatic suite in which their songs fruitfully played off one another. The closest they came to a meeting of sensibilities was early in the evening during back-to-back abridged versions of Mr. Simon¡¯s ¡°59th Street Bridge Song (Feelin¡¯ Groovy)¡± and Porter¡¯s ¡°It¡¯s De-Lovely.¡±
The sequence suggested a story in which played a high-strung, not always sympathetic everyman who descends from innocence into desperation, then returns to a tentative calm. At the nadir he is virtually torn apart by the emotional crises evoked in the songs, particularly Mr. Simon¡¯s.
A brainy showman whose sensitivity to lyrics is matched by his fearlessness as a performer, acted out songs with the ferocious, sweaty intensity of a man flirting with an emotional breakdown. His brassy, jazzy lounge singing occasionally leapt into a semi-falsetto. His sextet, led by the pianist Jeffrey Neiman, and featuring Kenny Gioffre¡¯s saxophone and Greg Utzig¡¯s guitar, followed him every step of the way.
In a harrowing mini-suite that connected Mr. Simon¡¯s ¡°Have a Good Time¡± with Porter¡¯s ¡°It¡¯s All Right With Me¡± and ¡°Just One of Those Things,¡± his discontented alter ego went on a compulsive, destructive sexual bender. Instead of castigating himself, he made you feel the dangerous thrill of the chase along with the exhilaration of throwing off a stale partnership for new adventures. But there were also quiet moments. The small obedient voice he adopted for Mr. Simon¡¯s ¡°I¡¯d Do It for Your Love¡± set the stage for the explosion to follow.
Certain Simon songs were boldly reoutfitted. The original gospel setting of ¡°Loves Me Like a Rock¡± was discarded in favor a slower, jazzier, finger-snapping groove that allowed more room for the lyrics celebrating the solidity of maternal love. Instead of a sad murmur of surrender, ¡°Slip Slidin¡¯ Away¡± became a musical fistfight with the fates. A fragment of ¡°You Can Call Me Al¡± was spoken without musical accompaniment.
His encore, a tender ¡°Bridge Over Troubled Water,¡± brought back the theme of unconditional love that a parent feels for a child: the truest love there is.
