, a Brooklyn group started by Jennifer Weber in 2004, has an admirable purpose: to redefine the image of women in hip-hop. Ms. Weber¡¯s work goes against what is often an unfortunate sight: female dancers feigning toughness in baggy pants and baseball caps. In the past she has taken on Stravinsky¡¯s ¡°Firebird¡± and Jerome Robbins¡¯s ¡°.¡± She doesn¡¯t have a one-note mind.
On Friday evening the company returned to the Joyce SoHo with ¡°4,¡± the first section of an evening-length work set to Vivaldi¡¯s ¡°Four Seasons.¡± In the piece ¡ª devoted to the stormy ¡°Summer¡± section ¡ª Megan Alfonso and Adaku Utah share the stage, demonstrating how movement can switch from crisp to balmy at a moment¡¯s notice. The tools of hip-hop, which cause a body to break down and build back up again, give the familiar music a playful edge, even though the dancers aren¡¯t playing around.
The seriousness of the proposition is intriguing, as is the way the dancers refuse to mug. Ms. Utah, lean and muscular, uses her shoulders and arms to convey the sweep of the music; the compact Ms. Alfonso, with a flair for speed in low-to-the ground footwork, digs into the faster sections with attack. Since much of the piece is performed in unison, there is a sense of how two very different bodies approach musicality; one shows its curves, the other its angles. It¡¯s great that it¡¯s stripped down, but Ms. Weber could take that even further.
In ¡°When the Sky Breaks 3D,¡± a full-company work, the dancers battle not one another but the elements. The six performers, including Ann-Sylvia Clark, whose infectious energy embodies the way sunshine cracks through a cloud, find themselves in stormy situations.
That evening a technical problem with a projector made it impossible to grasp the 3-D effect; even so, ¡°Sky Breaks¡± has deeper structural problems. The pacing is ragged; in terms of mood, the dancers flicker confusingly between lightness and darkness. Perhaps it¡¯s better when Ms. Weber sticks to more formal ideas. In ¡°City Breathing: 2012 Remix,¡± featuring the soloist Taeko Koji, the cast wears glowing-wire costumes, which transform their bodies into neon-green squiggles dancing in the dark. This is Alwin Nikolais reimagined for hip-hop, and it¡¯s not a bad fit.
