Even when you have an iPod, there are those moments in New York life when you find yourself witnessing uncomfortable private moments: a couple, bickering on a subway platform and going at each other with barely disguised fury ¡ª in the form of eye-rolling, crossed arms and furrowed brows. In ¡°other stories,¡± has created and directed a work about these everyday occurrences, and while I¡¯d like to be supportive about giving life experiences meaning through dance, it¡¯s just painful.
That multilayered work was performed at the Joyce SoHo on Saturday afternoon as part of the theater¡¯s In Rep series, which features three companies overlapping in a three-week block.
Some background is helpful: for each of Ms. Beller¡¯s programs, a guest artist (on Saturday it was Karl Rogers), who has rehearsed minimally at best with the company, offers an improvisational performance. Those improvisations are copied and translated on the spot by Ms. Beller and her five dancers, who reteach the guest artist the movement material.
Brian Ireland¡¯s set, a small room on wheels, serves as an incubator of sorts; during much of the piece the dancers worked one on one with Mr. Rogers in the box, fleshing out the structure and nuances of the improvisations. These scenes, which were partially visible on two sides, were the most inventive part of ¡°other stories.¡± Here you can grasp something of what Ms. Beller is getting at: What happens to spontaneous movement when it is decoded or passed around? How, in other words, does an argument become more or less momentous in a person¡¯s memory? One part of Ms. Beller¡¯s work is the notion of interpretation.
The rest of the choreographic material, and this constitutes most of the show, is a less appealing strand of dance-theater, in which the cast speaks (sometimes just mouthing words) while making a multitude of gestures that become more finicky with each passing moment. ¡°This is the burn from his seat belt,¡± Lea Fulton says, as she cups her fingers onto her palm and then draws them away.
¡°This is my favorite way to see the world,¡± she adds, scissoring her fingers to make a walking motion.
Later these actions are strung together and performed by the others. The cumulative effect does not, however, make for gripping dance-theater; it¡¯s too self-conscious. A score for electric guitar (its composer, , plays it live in parts) does a better job at creating a dark, meditative mood, as do the films in the piece, by Martijn Hart, which capture couples in city settings: through an apartment window or on a bench in the rain. These dancers need distance to tell stories with their bodies.
