Jane Taylor, the founding bassoonist of the, one of the premier ensembles to involve that uneasy alliance of flute, oboe, clarinet, French horn and bassoon, died on Sunday in Manhattan. She was 79.
The cause was a heart attack, said her sister, Beatrice Asken.
Ms. Taylor, who lived for a half-century in the same Morningside Heights apartment in Manhattan, had remained with the Dorian for 40 years after helping to form it in 1961, when she was one of a relatively small number of women who played the bassoon professionally. She was the only original member to stay past the mid-1960s, retiring in 2002.
Wind quintets don¡¯t have it easy. String quartets, made up of four similar instruments that blend seamlessly and resonate together, are the thoroughbreds of chamber music.
In contrast, wind quintets are an awkward five-way marriage. Each instrument has a different way of attacking notes. Some are wood and some are metal, and the timbres are all very different, even within their own range of registers. Woodwind quintets also lack the immense repertory of masterpieces available to string quartets, which can choose among the works of Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert and plenty of others.
Still, a quintet¡¯s diversity can create a large palette of colors and contrasts, and wind quintets can have a punchy sound with distinct soloistic voices.
The Dorian proved to have few rivals. It has toured around the world, regularly performed in concerts and released numerous recordings. And Ms. Taylor was its heart and soul, its members said ¡ª a peacemaker when musicians clashed, the repair person when the group was on the road, and its guiding hand after the early years.
¡°She kept track of every concert, every program we did, every change of personnel,¡± said Jerry Kirkbride, the clarinetist, who joined in 1970.
He recalled that at one point, the quintet changed its stage formation, with Ms. Taylor moving from next to him to the rear. ¡°She was a light back there,¡± he said. ¡°How nice it was to see her facing the audience, with her complete enjoyment of music-making. It was a ¡®Dorian plus¡¯ ¡ª very appealing to the audience.¡±
Ms. Taylor was born on Sept. 27, 1932, in White Plains. Her father was a painter and her mother a singer. The family lost their house in the Depression and moved to Brooklyn when Ms. Taylor was 5, said Ms. Asken, who is her only survivor.
Ms. Taylor started studying the bassoon at the High School of Music and Art in Manhattan. ¡°I took to it like a duck to water,¡± she said in a 2002 interview with the magazine The Double Reed. She went on to study with Bernard Garfield, later a member of the Philadelphia Orchestra, and with Harold Goltzer of the New York Philharmonic. She attended Queens College and then spent four years with the Florida Symphony Orchestra in Orlando.
In 1960 Ms. Taylor was invited by a Queens classmate, the flutist John Perras, to form an ensemble at the to play the works of the composition students of Aaron Copland. After that first summer they decided to form a quintet, choosing the name Dorian after the musical mode and the column (they liked its simplicity). The other original members were David Perkett, oboe; Arthur Bloom, clarinet; and William G. Brown, horn.
Ms. Taylor was also a teacher and freelance musician, playing with the American Symphony Orchestra and the Long Island Philharmonic, among other ensembles.
Looking back over her career, Ms. Taylor told The Double Reed that the Dorian had set a standard of wind playing. ¡°I¡¯m hoping,¡± she said, ¡°that people look to us through our recordings and our performances to say, ¡®Gee, I¡¯d like to do that.¡¯?¡±
