has shown little inclination to trade in his violin for a baton, so the announcement last September that he would become the music director of the in London seemed surprising. As it turns out, the position does not actually demand that he let the fiddle slip from his lands, let alone exchange it for a stick.
When he led the orchestra at Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday evening, in his American debut as its director, he conducted Beethoven¡¯s ¡°Coriolan¡± Overture and Symphony No. 4, as well as the encore, the opening movement of Mozart¡¯s Symphony No. 25, from the concertmaster¡¯s chair. Between the overture and the symphony, he was the soloist in Beethoven¡¯s Violin Concerto, and so led the orchestra standing, though as much with his head and upper torso as with his hands (even when he was not playing).
It is probably too soon to judge what Mr. Bell can bring to this orchestra. It has always been a sleek, precision ensemble with a warm, full sound, and it was so here. That said, Mr. Bell seemed an assured leader who knows what he wants and is intent on getting it. What he wanted in ¡°Coriolan¡± was drama, something he achieved through stark dynamic contrasts and tense, hard-driven string lines.
Those qualities were magnified in his bracing account of the Fourth Symphony, which sounded, for once, like a major essay: a worthy bridge between the ¡°Eroica¡± and the Fifth Symphony, rather than the transitional placeholder it too often seems to be.
Given that, you might have expected the Violin Concerto to be an equally vehement battle between soloist and ensemble, with violin heroics set against a rich tide of Beethovenian orchestration. But Mr. Bell avoided that approach, presenting the work instead as a sweet-toned dialogue. He has the sound for that, certainly, and he capitalized on it.
Reasonable listeners may differ as to whether that was enough: for me, his interpretation was prettily turned but lightweight and uneventful, except in the showy cadenzas (his own), which were fiery and inventive, in the best tradition.
The Mozart encore was an appeal to memories of this orchestra¡¯s storied past. As Mr. Bell noted, the ensemble¡¯s performance, conducted by Neville Marriner, is heard in the Mr. Bell¡¯s version matched the energy of that reading.
