Virginia Woolf titled one essay ¡°On Not Knowing Greek,¡± which she began, ¡°For it is vain and foolish to talk of knowing Greek.¡± In the world of the performing arts the same disclaimer should be applied by Westerners to the Japanese traditional forms of and . Though these styles have been repeatedly seen in the West for decades, familiarization does not erode their strangeness. Last of Kabuki dance at , featuring Bando Kotoji with live music, was not more difficult than several other performances of Kabuki I have seen; its finest passages were picturesque, eloquent and remarkable. Yet challenges remain.
In the case of Kabuki it is remarkably hard even to pin down its salient characteristics, though white makeup, masklike facial composure and formal costumes are customary. Many Westerners assume that Kabuki is an all-male genre, with female roles taken by male players in the tradition. Mr. Bando¡¯s troupe, however, is not the first I have seen to feature women.
To Westerners the distinctions between Kabuki dance and theater are often opaque. I have known Western dance critics who insist that Kabuki theater fell into their domain and Western theater critics who insist that Kabuki dance fell into theirs. My impression is that Kabuki is remarkably diverse and surrounded in Japan by controversies both among those who practice it and among those who find it outmoded.
So when Westerners find they like some Kabuki, are they admiring something that has been subtly Westernized in unascertainable ways? When a Kabuki performance leaves us cold, is that because we¡¯re seeing something authentic but distanced from our sensibilities, or because we are simply seeing a poor rendition?
All these questions occurred to me at Japan Society on Thursday. The performance, directed by Mr. Bando, was a quadruple bill; its most memorable features lay in visual and movement features like costume, scenery, gesture and characterization, some of which were at least as odd as they were fine. But the aspects that most challenge a Western audience are surely musical and aural.
Throughout much of the action percussion is played offstage but with no sustained meter and no evident connection to the movement or the music on view. Three of the four programs feature the same group of four musicians, seated in a diagonal line on one side of the stage: two are vocalists, two are string players. Though the instrumentalists play in regular meters that are easy on Western ears, much about this sound world is otherwise alien: the use of extreme vibrato and covered resonance in the singing, the clipped twanging and peculiar tuning of the banjolike instruments.
Is it because ¡°Tamatori Ama¡± (¡°The Pearl Diver¡±) is musically easier on these Western ears that I liked it most? I think not, but certainly the onstage music, played and sung by Fujii Hirokazu, made a valuably beautiful contribution; here is Kabuki of a different sound style. Melodic vocal lines often include sustained high notes that had their own piercing eloquence.
The dancing of ¡°Tamatori Ama¡± is a female solo, heroic in narration but intensely restrained in style, played by Furusawa Ufo. The tale is about the self-sacrifice of a female pearl diver who dives deeper than ever before, pursued by the Divine Dragon. With extreme economy, the dancer¡¯s fan becomes the waves through which she travels, the knife with which she opens her own flesh, and finally the lifeline on which she tugs. The movement is a laconic illustration to the words (translated on a screen at the side of the stage). The final image, of her gently rotating as her fan and raised arm seem to pull her up to the surface as her life ends, represents the restraint of Kabuki style at its most remarkable.
Longer and also fine is the closing piece, ¡°Yoshino-Yama¡± (¡°Yoshino Mountain¡±), a dance-mime scene for two. Nothing here is more wonderful than the backdrop, showing strongly pink cherry blossoms in the foreground, spreading green mountains in the center, and then further blue mountains in the distance; lines of other cherry blossoms run along the landscape like ropes of mist. The story, which recurs in Kabuki dance-drama, is a dialogue between the female lover of a lost warrior and a white fox who has taken the guise of the warrior¡¯s servant. The two characters reminisce, recalling in particular one bygone battle.
Here Mr. Bando, as the fox-servant, shows the dry wit and mysteriously philosophical suggestiveness of Kabuki movement. The story ends with him alone, no longer evoking the past or pretending to be someone else, reflecting intensely, only then to droop, while petals fall.
An earlier work in the program, ¡°Cho No Michiyuki¡± (¡°The Last Journey of Two Butterflies¡±), is quaint, pretty, but remarkably unaffecting. And the introductory ¡°Sanbaso,¡± a dance invocation by Mr. Bando, shows Kabuki dance¡¯s muted dynamics and some of its vocabulary (skips, hops, turns) without making them remotely engaging or engrossing.
