I¡¯ll admit it. I wasn¡¯t expecting Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning, the new fantasy role-playing game from 38 Studios, to be very good.
Actually, I was pretty sure it was going to fit squarely into the hallowed category known as drivelware. I was pretty sure that after just a few hours in Amalur I would be shaking my head in frustration, yearning to return to established role-playing heavyweights like and .
It¡¯s been a long time since I¡¯ve been so happy to be so wrong. Fabulously wrong. Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning isn¡¯t just good. It sings with infectious, engaging excellence. This is a game that knows exactly what it wants to be, what it wants to provide and what its players will enjoy. Then it delivers with confidence, style and, not least, fun in abundance. Kingdoms of Amalur: Reckoning is one of the finest action role-playing games yet made.
And did I mention that Reckoning is 38 Studios¡¯ first game ever?
Which is all to say that I underestimated Curt Schilling yet again. Yes, that Curt Schilling. He of the bloody sock. He of the three World Series championships. He of the jersey No. 38, the figure that graces the name of the video game company that Mr. Schilling founded and owns.
You see, back in 2006, while he was still pitching for the Boston Red Sox, Mr. Schilling started posting regularly on one of the most important Internet forums for fans of multiplayer online role-playing games, . Posting under the tag Ngruk, Mr. Schilling said he had been playing serious online role-playing games since the original EverQuest (and following through to World of Warcraft). He said he hoped to start his own game company after he retired from baseball and planned to invest significant chunks of his personal fortune in making top-quality fantasy games replete with orcs, elves, goblins, wizards, swords, spells, dungeons, dragons and all the other trappings of Tolkien-esque adventure.
Needless to say, this was a bit difficult to take seriously. After all, plenty of professional athletes say they love video games, but you don¡¯t hear them talking about building their own game companies. A record label? Sure. A line of clothing? Of course. But hiring dozens, or hundreds, of people? Spending years and the millions of dollars required to make a top-end role-playing game? And then actually coming up with something great?
¡°O.K.,¡± I said to myself. ¡°I¡¯ll believe it when I see it.¡±
Well, now I see it. So now I think I believe it, even though at some level I¡¯m still not quite sure it¡¯s really happening. It¡¯s a bit like watching Mr. Schilling¡¯s Red Sox beat the Yankees, my favorite team, four games in a row to take the 2004 American League Championship Series ¡ª except that this time I¡¯m enjoying myself immensely.
From the very first minute of Reckoning, I could just sense the cozy embrace of people who know what fantasy role-playing games are all about: giving players meaningful choices about how they want to play while also providing an engaging world to explore, and tight combat systems that reward different sorts of play styles. Oh, yeah, and it helps if the graphics look pretty, and the software doesn¡¯t crash all the time. Reckoning delivers in each category.
Nothing here reinvents the fantasy role-playing wheel. And yet Reckoning rarely feels tired. Instead each of the basic elements is where it should be, but packaged with a level of polish and flair that no one had any right to expect.
Visually, the game takes abundant inspiration from World of Warcraft¡¯s stylized, colorful art direction. While the other top single-player fantasy games these days, Skyrim and Witcher, try to portray European medievalism realistically, Reckoning is a place of mysticism. In Skyrim a forest is just supposed to look like a real forest (until the trolls or dragons show up). In Reckoning a forest is filled with lambent beams of energy. The trees and undergrowth glow. In short, it looks like magic.
As in Skyrim, there is a main quest in Reckoning that you can very easily put on the back burner while you spend 150 hours or more on side quests: exploring various zones and their denizens, cultivating your reputation with different factions like mercenaries or mages, or just wandering around dungeons and caves. Of course everywhere there are secrets to uncover and shiny treasure to accumulate. (But in its overall structure, Reckoning plays more like a single-player rendition of World of Warcraft than any game I¡¯ve seen.)
Character customization is robust and enjoyable. Rather than being locked in to one defined role, you can choose among abilities generally associated with three of the main fantasy archetypes: warrior, rogue and wizard. But you can mix and match as you please, and the game consciously steers you toward mastering a bit of all three.
In my case, I ended up specializing simultaneously in the use of poison, bows, long swords and ice magic. The combat system is a triumph, rewarding preparation while also delivering high-octane action propelled by some compelling animations. Without question, I find combat more enjoyable in Reckoning than in Skyrim.
Perhaps most impressive, especially for a first-time developer, is that in more than 50 hours with the Windows version of Reckoning, the game has not crashed a single time. Loading times are short, and technically the game feels rock-solid. (The game, rated M for Mature and published through Electronic Arts, is also available for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3.)
Reckoning is not the online multiplayer world that Mr. Schilling originally set out to create. He scaled down his ambitions to a more manageable single-player game in 2009, as 38 Studios acquired Big Huge Games, a developer in Maryland that was already working on a single-player experience. So, as a practical matter, the real praise for making Reckoning, as excellent as it is, should go to Ken Rolston and his team at Big Huge. They are the real stars here.
But Mr. Schilling deserves a tremendous amount of credit for not messing up the work of the professionals and cultivating, understanding and protecting the vision that the Big Huge team has pursued. From a Yankee fan to a Yankee killer, I offer a gracious tip of my cap.
