¡°LISTEN to this,¡± the pianist said, clicking ¡°play¡± on his iPhone. The recording, a synthesizer track that approximated the sounds of a piano and a vibraphone, was a rough demo for ¡°The Visitors,¡± a work the jazz pianist had written for Mr. Gerstein and his former mentor the vibraphonist .
On this chilly afternoon in mid-February Mr. Gerstein had not yet seen the finished score, though rehearsals with Mr. Burton for a performance at in Boston at the end of March were scheduled to begin the following week in Florida. But Mr. Gerstein knew how the rest of the program would play out. It would include the premiere of a half-hour set of variations written for him by another jazz star, ; a few jazz-tinged Ligeti ¨¦tudes; another duet with Mr. Burton on Oscar Levant¡¯s ¡°Blame It on My Youth¡±; several of Earl Wild¡¯s Gershwin transcriptions; and the original 1924 band version of Gershwin¡¯s ¡°Rhapsody in Blue.¡±
That might seem an unusual program for a 32-year-old Russian-born classical pianist who won the Arthur Rubinstein Piano Competition in Tel Aviv in 2001 and the prestigious $300,000 in 2010 and has methodically been building his career as a recitalist, chamber player and concerto soloist. His calling cards have been fiery, dramatic accounts of works like Liszt¡¯s B minor Sonata, the centerpiece of his recent recording on the Myrios Classics label, or programs like the one he will play at the 92nd Street Y next Saturday and at the Irving S. Gilmore International Keyboard Festival in Kalamazoo, Mich., a week later. It includes works by Bach, Busoni, Weber, Schumann, Schubert and Oliver Knussen.
The , and the Myrios label was on hand to record it for release late this year. Balancing classical music and jazz, and deciding which to focus on, or whether he has to make a choice at all, has been an important part of Mr. Gerstein¡¯s life, and he has had different answers at different times. It was his talent as a 12-year-old wizard at improvisation, after all, that brought him to Mr. Burton¡¯s attention when he was performing at a festival in the Soviet Union. Two years later Mr. Burton offered Mr. Gerstein a scholarship to Berklee, a conservatory that specializes in jazz.
Mr. Gerstein also studied classical repertory at Boston University and at Tanglewood, and by the time he had completed a master¡¯s degree at the Manhattan School of Music, when he was 20, he had settled on the idea of a classical career.
¡°Kirill is such a thorough musician, deep down, that whatever form of music he might choose, there is no doubt he would be brilliant at it,¡± Mr. Burton wrote in an e-mail. ¡°Even though he was only 14 when he came to Berklee, he quickly became one of the respected players among the students, and frankly I was quite surprised when he left jazz behind and changed to classical. When I heard he had won the Rubinstein prize, I just chuckled to myself and said, yep, that¡¯s Kirill, knockin¡¯ ¡¯em dead whatever he¡¯s playing.¡±
Daniel R. Gustin, the director of the Gilmore Festival, sees Mr. Gerstein¡¯s jazz background as an essential element of his interpretive style. ¡°I¡¯ve always felt, in Kirill¡¯s playing, a freedom with the musical material that I attribute to his love for jazz,¡± Mr. Gustin said, pointing out that Mr. Gerstein and Mr. Mehldau will play a joint concert at the Gilmore Festival on May 9. ¡°I asked Kirill what they were going to do, and he said they didn¡¯t know yet.¡±
Mr. Gerstein, for his part, observed that no pianist he knew was equally eloquent in both styles, so he chose to focus on classical music. But his practice routine still includes stretches of jazz improvisation, as a palate cleanser of sorts. And at times he wonders about the path not taken.
¡°It always interested me, this connection between jazz and classical: where the line starts to blur, and how different and similar they are,¡± Mr. Gerstein said. ¡°My feeling was always, internally, that they are very similar. Jazz was an important part of my growing up musically, but I don¡¯t know how successful or interesting I would have been as a jazz pianist. I also feel like there¡¯s an important part of me that still wants to explore something with jazz, but I think it¡¯s important for me not to get the illusion that it¡¯s something I could do as intensively.¡±
Curiously, Mr. Gerstein has hesitated to play his own improvisatory cadenzas in Mozart concertos and other 18th-century works. But that may change.
¡°For me that¡¯s hard because if I start improvising, I lapse into the tongue of jazz,¡± he said. ¡°I don¡¯t have the experience of improvising within a Classical style the way someone like Robert Levin does, and sometimes I think I would love to take some lessons with him. One thing the Gilmore told me, and this is a pleasant thing to keep in mind, is that I can take time to work with musicians who interest me: for example, to go to Boston for a week to speak with Bob and work on Mozart cadenzas with him. Generally I¡¯m still enthusiastic about studying and learning.¡±
