Sell-out rock shows usually mean a lot of shouting, some sweating, maybe a few drunken pass-outs. Kraftwerk inspired none of that on Tuesday night. The first of its eight consecutive sold-out performances at the Museum of Modern Art had reverence and stylistic weight; even for a New York museum crowd there was a lot of black. Artfully swept hair, uncomfortable-looking shoes, architectural glasses: check, check and check. The high-design audience was rewarded with an equally aesthetically tuned concert, with the band, a foursome in graphic black-and-white unitards, playing neon-lighted synths. Behind them a video screen offered a parade of simple 3-D images, like stick figure robots and spinning numbers, a retro future in an MS-DOS font.
The show, part of a retrospective for this pioneering German electronica group, was a coveted event, with fewer than 450 tickets available to the public for each night of the run. All eight sold out within an hour when they went on sale in February. (With a face value of $25, they were going for hundreds afterward.)
On Tuesday several diehard Kraftwerk fans waited outside the museum in the vain hope of scoring an extra ticket. ¡°I grew up listening to this in high school,¡± said Andy Horowitz, 49, a banker turned teacher from Long Island. ¡°It¡¯s got a real good sound. It¡¯s melodic, pulsating, makes you want to move. It¡¯s timeless.¡± Mr. Horowitz, who had also turned up at the museum a few days earlier to inquire about more spots, said he might return nightly but was holding out for Friday, when the band is scheduled to perform its seminal 1978 album,?¡°The Man-Machine.¡± ¡°The personal computer, space, technology ¡ª they hit it right on the head,¡± Mr. Horowitz said. Kraftwerk was expected to play a full album a night, with some bonus and new material mixed in.
¡°Autobahn,¡± the 1974 album that opened the series, seemed to be few people¡¯s favorite, but with this kind of manufactured scarcity they took what they could get. Richard Weed, a graphic artist, had five friends flood the ticket Web site in search of a ticket for him ¡°as a 50th birthday present,¡± he said. One friend succeeded; Mr. Weed called her a hero and rewarded her with a concert T-shirt, one of several bits of Kraftwerk memorabilia he bought. (Mr. Weed, a mega-fan who had seen the band at its previous outing in New York, in 2005, and even attended a listening party for ¡°¡± in Brooklyn a few days before the museum event, said he liked its ¡°very singular aesthetic.¡±)
Suki Kwan, 24, a restaurant manager, was not exactly a Kraftwerk devotee but was pushed to go by a taste-maker friend, she said, who convinced her that ¡°this was a once-in-a-lifetime experience, that Kraftwerk is a cultural institution.¡±
As for getting the tickets, ¡°my boyfriend and I did a kind of feng shui thing with laptops,¡± she explained, giggling. ¡°There were plants, and there was a bonsai tree. I was laying on my bed, and he put the laptop on the bed.¡± Her boyfriend, Arkadiy Kukarkin, 24, a developer for a music Web site, ruefully admitted that the setup might¡¯ve been his idea. ¡°I think it was very good energy,¡± she said, smiling, as they rushed into the show.
The performance was held in the museum¡¯s atrium, but the whole place seemed to be prepped for what the program called ¡°the first synthetic retrospective of Kraftwerk¡¯s oeuvre.¡± There were robots in the lobby, and dim mood lighting everywhere. Audience members sipped German beer and discussed the audio quality of the space. (Mr. Weed said he recognized at least one person from the listening party.)
When the show started, with the familiar beats of ¡°¡± and a video with the lyrics in spinning text, people stood gaping with their 3-D glasses on. Reverence eventually gave way to rapture, even a little head bobbing and swaying. Fran Drescher was there ¡ª she posted a photo of herself in her 3-D glasses on ¡ª and Michael Stipe was spotted in the gift shop later.
Joerg Haentzschel, a New York-based writer for the German daily S¨¹ddeutsche Zeitung, said the Kraftwerk retrospective would not be that big a deal back home. ¡°I think the Americans are bigger fans than the Germans,¡± he said. ¡°It¡¯s the accents and the whole sort of Teutonic attitude they have. Very cold.¡±
But for the Detroit techno heads and ¡¯80s krautrock aficionados busy posing for photos with the jumpsuited Kraftwerk automatons in the lobby, there was nothing cold about it. One after another they hailed the group¡¯s innovation and its staying power.
¡°They were my favorite band in high school,¡± said Theresa Mershon, 33, a creative director for a digital publisher, who¡¯d also seen the group before. To get tickets this time she and a friend entered a organized by Volkswagen, a sponsor. It asked participants for GIFs: the little animated images that are the visual currency of the Internet, the very kind of simple, repetitive compositions that the band coined musically and anticipated visually. Ms. Mershon gladly created eight GIFs.
¡°Kraftwerk was basically one of the major things that got me into electronic music,¡± she said. ¡°My overarching love of creepy synths originates with them.¡±
