The lights rise on a spare Victorian drawing room. The place looks dead. Not only is the furniture draped in dust covers, but the floor is also a rumpled sea of cloth. The six people onstage are still. When they start moving, they move very, very slowly.
¡°Last Touch First,¡± which had its New York premiere at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday, is more a play than a narrative dance. Though there¡¯s no dialogue in this 2008 collaboration between , the former artistic director of Nederlands Dans Theater, and , an American choreographer living in Europe, the hourlong work has a plot. It even has plot twists.
The characters don¡¯t have names, but they do have identities: the young romantic, the randy old man, the woman who drowns her sorrows in drink. And the performers have character; apart from Mr. Schumacher they¡¯re all veterans of the various branches of Nederlands Dans Theater, and their collective experience as stage artists helps create a sense of shared history. Much has passed among these characters, much has been repressed. It¡¯s all about to explode.
That the performers are also dancers is evident in the impressive physical control required for the production¡¯s conceit: most of the work unfolds in slow motion.
The glacial pacing, however, doesn¡¯t mean that there¡¯s less action than in a regular play. There¡¯s more. You really have to pay attention to keep up with the characters¡¯ couplings and interactions. Flirting, groping, fighting, biting, topsy-turvy domestic warfare ¡ª if played at normal speed, all this misbehavior would look like slapstick.
Sometimes the tempo does speed up for a second or two, as if the divine finger slowing down the record has slipped. Near the end the inhibiting finger lets go for longer. This tension and release is paralleled in Dirk Haubrich¡¯s horror-movie score, which interrupts elegiac piano notes with ear-splitting stabs of snapping and slicing. Mr. Haubrich doesn¡¯t want you to fall asleep.
The slowness isn¡¯t boring, though. The trouble is in the emotional tone. A note in the program compares the atmosphere to that of a Chekhov play, but in Chekhov, while guns will fire, most of the emotion remains potently under the surface, so that you might mistakenly believe that nothing important was happening.
In ¡°Last Touch First¡± everything is overwrought. At the slow pace, an action as simple as licking a finger to turn a page or licking a card to paste it on someone¡¯s forehead turns nearly pornographic. The cantilevered balances the performers wrangle one another into are contrived for visual effect, but few of the visual effects are worth the contrivance.
Two or three light moments of silent-movie humor can¡¯t offset the heaviness of having the women gather in front of the mirror to hiss and claw at their reflections.
Might the women be dissatisfied with their bourgeois existence? That¡¯s the level of psychological revelation that ¡°Last Touch First¡± blows up. In the end the characters pull themselves together and pose ¡ª as if for a portrait ¡ª like they were at the beginning, as if nothing had happened. In truth not much of import has.
