MONTCLAIR, N.J. ¡ª It¡¯s no secret why people want to be famous. They want to be loved. They want to live forever.
In ¡°Fame,¡± the hourlong dance by the Israeli choreographers Lee Sher and Saar Harari and their troupe, the Company, that had its debut in Montclair State University¡¯s Peak Performances series here on Thursday, the seven dancers sometimes seem to be posing for a camera and sometimes seem to be primping in a mirror. The private need beneath the public display is what the work, with intermittent success, seeks to expose.
It helps that the cast displays strong stage presence. Jye-Hwei Lin, Hsin-Yi Hsiang and Hyerin Lee, in particular, are striking even when standing still, much less when extending a flexed foot above head level. They look glamorously at home in the company style, which (highly influenced by the Gaga technique of the Israeli choreographer Ohad Naharin) is high-strung with a snap to it and festooned with odd, non sequitur gestures. It¡¯s always clear that these dancers have an intention, even if it¡¯s not clear what that intention is.
That the cast is international ¡ª Ms. Lin and Ms. Hsiang hail from Taiwan, Ms. Lee from Korea ¡ª allows for a cosmopolitan twist on the theme. Ms. Lee poses with chopsticks in her hair. Ms. Lin slides across the stage on her back like the heroine of a Chinese action flick, gripping a gun and lamenting her imminent death in Mandarin. Ms. Hsiang minces on like a Geisha, carrying a ceramic cat head, a lucky charm in Japan and China.
Just as these props are both stereotypical and authentic (and possibly humorous), these episodes are both foreign and familiar, culture bound and globally resonant. That¡¯s also true of Mr. Harari in a cowboy hat and underwear, riding an imaginary horse and laconically rolling a cigarette in pantomime. And of Ms. Sher, embodying the self-adoration of a pop star as she lip-syncs a saccharine Israeli pop song. It¡¯s true of the rest of the sample-heavy score, an internationally stocked iPod set on shuffle. And it¡¯s true, for that matter, of Gaga-derived technique.
Ms. Sher¡¯s episode will be especially familiar to anyone who saw LeeSaar¡¯s 2008 ¡°Geisha,¡± in which she used the same gambit in a tighter, more coherent treatment of a similar theme. ¡°Fame¡± reiterates its creators¡¯ fascination with sexuality ¡ª there¡¯s lots of come-hither hip rolling ¡ª without deepening or complicating it.
The piece seems most concerned about what people will do for fame. Candice Schnurr spreads her legs to exhibit her crotch. Ms. Hsiang makes a monkey of herself, scrunching up her face and scratching her sides. Ms. Sher acts out casting couch sex or a fantasy of it, rocking her pelvis, voicing both roles and smiling strangely afterward.
At the end a fade-out turns into a fake-out. The audience on Thursday seemed unsure whether to clap until the houselights came up. Many of them had started to leave when, with the houselights still up, the dancers returned to the stage, as if their desire for exposure were insatiable. Just as suddenly the music cut off and the performers exited ¡ª a fitting finish for a sputtering show.
