Now that Miami City Ballet has chosen its new artistic director, it seems hard to imagine someone with a better r¨¦sum¨¦ for the job.
The company ¡ª one of the premier regional dance companies and a major repository of the Balanchine tradition ¡ª announced on Tuesday that it had hired Lourdes Lopez to succeed Edward Villella, the company¡¯s longtime artistic director, who will stay on for next season.
Ms. Lopez, 53, danced in New York City Ballet for more than two decades, interpreting many of Balanchine¡¯s and Jerome Robbins¡¯s roles as a principal dancer. She was born in Cuba to an army officer who, she said in a phone interview, fought the rebel forces of Fidel Castro, a prime pedigree for many Cuban-Americans in Miami. She grew up in Miami until she was 14, when she moved to New York to study at the School of American Ballet.
And, Ms. Lopez said, she is ¡°completely committed¡± to the Balanchine style. ¡°It¡¯s a philosophy that I grew up around,¡± she said, adding that Miami City Ballet¡¯s dancers were exemplars. ¡°They¡¯re stage animals. There¡¯s a raw energy, there¡¯s a passion about them. That¡¯s what Mr. B. wanted.¡±
In the interview Ms. Lopez said she had two or three contemporary choreographers, whom she did not name, in mind as candidates to create new dances for the company. New work ¡°forces the dancers to break free, to think differently,¡± she said. ¡°It challenges audiences. I would like to see more of that.¡±
Ms. Lopez currently runs , a New York-based company she founded with the prominent choreographer Christopher Wheeldon in 2007. Mr. Wheeldon left the company three years later amid a falling-out with Ms. Lopez.
But Ms. Lopez said she wanted to consider some sort of merger or partnership of Morphoses and Miami City Ballet, and was open to including Wheeldon works in her new company.
Ms. Lopez joined City Ballet at 16, becoming a principal dancer in 1984. After retiring as a dancer at 39, she worked as a culture reporter for WNBC in New York, an administrator at Ballet Academy East in New York and, starting in 2002, as executive director of the George Balanchine Foundation.
However, despite the snugly fitting r¨¦sum¨¦, not all is likely to be smooth for Ms. Lopez. Mr. Villella, 75, a star of a previous Balanchine era and once a major figure in popular culture, announced his departure in the fall, stunning and distressing the dancers, many of whom had danced under him for their entire careers. Mr. Villella helped establish the company and was its patriarch. to have been forced out by a faction of the board opposed to him, although the company maintains he decided to leave of his own accord.
The search came down to Ms. Lopez and Jennifer Kronenberg, 35, a principal dancer with Miami City Ballet who is well liked by audiences and her colleagues. She was seen as having a special understanding of the atmosphere of a company steeped in Mr. Villella¡¯s training and had spent her entire career in Miami.
Ms. Kronenberg was also strongly backed by Mr. Villella, who lobbied for her. The dancers were split evenly between them.
Ms. Lopez was recommended by Robert Gottlieb, a dance critic and longtime company adviser working on the search.
The search committee voted 9 to 2 in Ms. Lopez¡¯s favor. Mr. Villella voted against her, as did one of two dancer representatives, as a symbolic reflection of the split within the company.
When asked how she would deal with opposition from dancers and a lack of support from Mr. Villella, Ms. Lopez said: ¡°I can¡¯t change the past. The present is an extraordinary company that Edward Villella built with tremendous love and passion.¡± She continued, ¡°What I hope will happen is that they will see that when I walk in there that I come from the same seed as Edward,¡± meaning, she said, Balanchine and his philosophy, training and style. Any opposition to her presence ¡°will subside with time,¡± she added.
Ms. Lopez, who lives in New York City, said she would start visiting the company in the summer and also visit during next season before taking up the job permanently on May 1, 2013.
In an internal e-mail last week stating that Ms. Lopez was the board favorite, the executive director, Nicholas Goldsborough, summed up her strengths: good at fund-raising, experienced in budgeting, a veteran of many roles in Miami¡¯s repertory, pragmatic, ¡°generally very reasonable,¡± a good listener and strong in issues of musicality and artistic taste. She was also described as strong-willed, even stubborn.
¡°I¡¯m a Taurus,¡± Ms. Lopez said. ¡°So yes, I am strong-willed. But I¡¯m also very fair.¡±
