Thomas Crawford¡¯s is working hard to be the period-instrument orchestra that survives and thrives in New York, where so many others have foundered. It is, in a way, a stealth contender: counting its earlier incarnation as the Orchestra of the Old Fairfield Academy, the ensemble has been exploring the late-18th- and early-19th-century repertory for 27 seasons. And its roster is full of names familiar from other period-instrument groups that ply the New York-Boston freelance corridor, among them the violinist Linda Quan, the violist David Miller, the cellist Myron Lutzke, the flutist Sandra Miller, the oboist Marc Schachman and the trumpeter John Thiessen.
For its final concert of the season, at Alice Tully Hall on Monday evening, the orchestra devoted itself to works by Mozart and Beethoven, presented in trim, sculptured readings that captured the vigor and zest of the historical style yet hewed closely to the timbres of a modern orchestra.
The strings, particularly, played with a smooth, rounded tone. And though the woodwinds produced a sound slightly warmer than that of their modern counterparts, they were brighter than period winds often are. The only inarguably antique timbres were those of the timpani, played by Dan Haskins, and the complex, textured blend of the valveless horns, in beautifully tuned performances by R. J. Kelley and Alexandra Cook.
Mr. Crawford opened and closed the program with movements from Beethoven¡¯s ¡°Creatures of Prometheus,¡± his only ballet score, best known as the source of the theme he varied so inventively in the finale of the ¡°Eroica¡± Symphony. The ballet music is heard infrequently, but its charms are many, and Mr. Crawford pointed them up with sharply accented phrasing and carefully nuanced dynamics.
He did much the same for Beethoven¡¯s Fourth Symphony. You could argue with a tempo occasionally: the opening Adagio, for example, was so lethargic that the ensemble seemed on the verge of disintegration. Yet the slow movement, also an Adagio, had a lovely lilt, its shapely themes supported by nimbly phrased accompanying figuration.
To open the second half of the program, Mr. Crawford turned over a reduced orchestra to the violinist , who led Mozart¡¯s Concerto No. 4 from the fiddle. Her sound was small but focused, and her interpretation was consistently lively and full of personal touches. Ms. Huggett seemed intent on keeping the performance from becoming a straightforward walk-through, and to that end she varied her articulation to create dialogues not only between the violin and the orchestra, but also within the violin line itself.
