Reputations are hard to keep up, especially when you¡¯re still referred to as the bad boy of British dance. It¡¯s something of a weakness then that the choreographer Michael Clark, included as part of the , cannot fully separate from his brash, younger self. Despite his attraction to provocative, sexual costumes and rock music, he built dances based on structure and form. The fashionable edge he worked so hard to cultivate is tempered by classical training at the Royal Ballet School.
In ¡°Who¡¯s Zoo?,¡± seen Friday evening at the Whitney Museum of American Art, Mr. Clark makes some troubling choices; for one, he forages deeply through the costuming and movement language of Merce Cunningham, even showcasing one of his former dancers. It¡¯s awkward to watch such repurposing of the Cunningham aesthetic, with its skittering feet, impossible balances and quivering muscles under Spandex.
At other times Mr. Clark appears as an interloper in sweatpants, socks and a sweatshirt ¡ª hood up ¡ª as if to illustrate the idea of a man out of his element. In one scene he poses with his legs apart in a grand pli¨¦ and swings a stool back and forth so that one of its legs appears at his crotch. It¡¯s like being hit over the head with a lead phallus.
The dance, which lasts nearly 40 minutes and is set to the music of Jarvis Cocker, the excellent British rocker, and his bands Pulp and Relaxed Muscle, is something of a follow-up to Mr. Clark¡¯s residency and performances at the last year. Even so, there are only fleeting moments of rigor. In following Sarah Michelson, the biennial¡¯s first dance presentation, Mr. Clark is at a disadvantage. Her uncompromising work, nearly 90 minutes long, in which dancers circled backward on a stage depicting the Whitney¡¯s architectural floor plan, will haunt the museum¡¯s fourth floor for a very long time.
¡°Who¡¯s Zoo?¡± features six dancers wearing sleek unitards by Stevie Stewart and Mr. Clark, with a large group of nonprofessional dancers performing simple movements in unison, including a stepping-in-a-square phrase that is also echoed by company members. The lighting designer Charles Atlas projects handsome geometrical beams onto the expanse of the back wall, and when the dancers change their costumes ¡ª from orange to black and silver ¡ª the lighting shifts too. There is no seating, but the reason for that is unclear, apart from how it decreases the distance of the performers to the audience. It is a little like a zoo.
Of the dancers, two are standouts: Harry Alexander, whose elegant bearing and suppleness gives him an otherworldly quality, and formerly of the Cunningham company (no relation). Her dancing cuts through mannerism like a switchblade. But too much of ¡°Who¡¯s Zoo?¡± follows multiple trains of thought. While the entrances, or beginnings of sections, are promisingly bold, they nosedive into half-hearted posturing. There is the vexatious feeling that Mr. Clark didn¡¯t follow through on his ideas, which makes the dance¡¯s more poignant moments all the more frustrating. When the cast¡¯s nondancers, who wear their vulnerability openly, move across the stage in militaristic rows ¡ª it has the feel of an encroaching plague ¡ª the dancers, in orange, cut through like streaks of fire licking trees in a forest.
The constant thread throughout is the marvelous Ms. Cunningham, who, in one moment, arches her back with such slow delicacy that she appears to be made of feather and steel. But those are mere moments of a dance in development. While it hasn¡¯t been officially announced, Mr. Cocker is expected to perform live at the Whitney this week. Will that be enough for Mr. Clark to ignite a flame? At the moment this dance is a series of sparks.
