Camilla Blaffer calls it her ¡°best find.¡± A grimy old-master painting of a saint gazing upward, his hands crossed on his chest and a skull perched on a rock in the foreground. A friend of Ms. Blaffer¡¯s bought the canvas, without realizing who painted it, on her behalf about 20 years ago at a small Paris auction. That canvas, along with hundreds of other artworks and decorative objects, languished in a warehouse outside Paris.
Some years later Ms. Blaffer asked her friend John T. Spike, an art historian and a scholar in residence at the Muscarelle Museum of Art at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Va., to meet her in Paris and take a look at the contents of the warehouse.
¡°It was a fluke,¡± said Ms. Blaffer, who is known as Coco and lives in Houston and New York. Although she earned a master¡¯s degree in art history and was a painter many years ago, with several New York shows of her psychedelic watercolors and oils, she still sought the advice of an expert.
¡°It had been extensively painted over,¡± Ms. Blaffer recalled. ¡°When you first look at it, it doesn¡¯t seem very beautiful.¡±
Mr. Spike recalled that the warehouse ¡°was full of everything you can imagine.¡± But when he spied the painting leaning against a wall, what stopped him was the saint¡¯s impeccably articulated elongated fingers. ¡°Just as striking was the skull, which was so tangible it looked as if it could be picked up from that rock,¡± he said. ¡°It was real quality.¡±
¡°I realized two yards away that it was an El Greco,¡± depicting St. Francis, Mr. Spike added. ¡°It is a known composition.¡±
St. Francis is a subject that El Greco returned to over and over. And, Mr. Spike said, there are two other versions of this painting in Italian museums. He said he believes Ms. Blaffer¡¯s canvas was made around 1575, about the time El Greco moved from Italy to Spain and started developing his signature mystical style.
¡°Knowing that El Greco often ¡ª maybe 25 percent of the time ¡ª signed his paintings, I at first didn¡¯t say anything, but I just walked over to look and there was a beautiful wiry little signature, Domenikos Theotokopoulos,¡± the artist¡¯s proper name, in the lower right-hand corner.
Ms. Blaffer sent the painting to London to be cleaned and restored and bought a period frame in Italy. During the restoration the signature was lost, Mr. Spike said, but that did not diminish his confidence that it was an El Greco.
The painting is being lent to the Muscarelle for ¡°Curators at Work II,¡± a show primarily of works from the museum¡¯s permanent collection that will go on view Saturday and run through June 24. This will be the first time Ms. Blaffer¡¯s painting has been seen in public since its purchase.
When the show ends, she said, she plans to hang the painting back where it had been most recently, in her New York apartment.

The exterior of the 19th-century cast-iron-fronted Drawing Center on Wooster Street in SoHo will look much as it always has when the center reopens on Sept. 13 after a yearlong, $9.6 million renovation, but the building will have 50 percent more exhibition space.
¡°For first time we will be able to hold three shows at once under the same roof,¡± said Brett Littman, the Drawing Center¡¯s director.
Claire Weisz, of WXY Architecture and Urban Design in New York, designed the space, creating two galleries on the ground floor, an education center and third gallery on the basement level. The second floor will have an additional 2,000 square feet. For the first time in its 35-year history the center will have proper climate control in all its galleries.
The center will reopen with three shows: drawings by the Argentine artist Guillermo Kuitca; ¡°The Yearbooks,¡± an exhibition of notebooks by the Colombian draftsman Jos¨¦ Antonio Su¨¢rez Londo?o; and an exhibition about the idea of authenticity.
A $104,000 grant from the Robert Rauschenberg Foundation is helping pay for a series of performances at the center later in the fall.

