


(through Sept. 2) Having escaped the ugly, West 53rd Street tomb of a building it inhabited from 2001 to 2011, the American Folk Art Museum has reoccupied its old space on Lincoln Square. This wonderful show of about 100 works from the permanent collection samples all the varieties of artistic expression under the museum¡¯s purview, from portraits and quilts by anonymous craftspeople to otherworldly fantasies envisioned by so-called Outsiders like Henry Darger and Martin Ram¨ªrez. The revival of this irreplaceable institution is cause of rejoicing. 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue, at 66th Street, (212) 595-9533, . (Ken Johnson)
(through May 6) This exhibition covers the late reign of the rich and powerful Mughals, from whom we derive the word mogul, tracking their decline, which coincided with the rise of British rule in India. Wall texts describe imperial intrigue and violence, while paintings depict serene landscapes and interiors and exquisitely drawn courtly figures. There are British colonial patrons called ¡°White Mughals¡± because they had Indian families and adopted local customs, and a final section in which the gruesome narrative told in the texts fuses with the images, in the medium of photography, in works like ¡°Zafar in Captivity,¡± which shows the last Mughal emperor as a profoundly defeated man. 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, (212) 517-2742, . (Martha Schwendener)
(through May 20) In the wilder moments of his career, Mr. Downey, who died of cancer in 1993 at 53 and is getting his first United States museum retrospective here, reversed the traditional dynamic of sculpture, examining how humans could affect objects rather than the other way around; administered oxygen to pedestrians on the street in New York in ¡°Fresh Air¡± (1972); and cohabitated as a kind of gonzo anthropologist ¡ª or early implementer of art as social practice ¡ª with the Yanomami Indians in Venezuela. Central to his vision, which drew on Frederick Kubler, critical theory and hallucinogenic states of mind, Mr. Downey also developed a concept of ¡°invisible architecture,¡± which he described in 1973 as ¡°an attitude of total communication within which ultra-developed minds will be telepathically cellular to an electromagnetic whole.¡± 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street, Morrisania, the Bronx, (718) 681-6000, . (Schwendener)
(through July 8) Heavy on the party photographs and punk-to-New Wave soundtrack, this show repackages the mythic Haring ¡ª club kid, Warhol prot¨¦g¨¦ and maker of friendly street art ¡ª for a younger generation. But other Harings emerge in rarely seen early drawings, collages, journals and, especially, in short performative videos like ¡°Painting Myself Into a Corner¡± and ¡°Tribute to Gloria Vanderbilt.¡± 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, (718) 638-5000, . (Karen Rosenberg)
(through Aug. 12) Ms. Kneebone, a British artist, has been invited by the Brooklyn Museum to riff on Rodin and chose 15 works from the museum¡¯s permanent collection to show with her own porcelain sculptures. She is drawn to Rodin¡¯s maquettes, or the smaller models on which larger sculptures were based. Some works recall wedding cakes and Baroque or Rococo fountains. Chef d¡¯oeuvre of the show, ¡°The Descent¡± (2008), recalls Rodin¡¯s ¡°Gates of Hell¡± and is comprised of dozens of little figures descending into a cauldron-shaped pit. That Ms. Kneebone¡¯s project is installed in the museum¡¯s Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art might suggest that you¡¯re going to get a feminist flogging of Rodin, but Ms. Kneebone does not head down that path. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, (718) 638-5000, . (Schwendener)
(through April 22) In 1831, a farmer on the Isle of Lewis, the largest island of the Outer Hebrides, discovered a lost cache of medieval chess pieces. Today, thanks to ¡°Harry Potter and the Sorcerer¡¯s Stone,¡± in which Harry and Ron play with magically animated replicas of them, the Lewis Chessmen are world famous. On tour from the British Museum, these adorable, bug-eyed little kings, queens, bishops, knights and warders, each beautifully carved from walrus ivory, are wonderful to examine up close. You don¡¯t have to be a chess player or a Harry Potter fan to love them. 99 Margaret Corbin Drive, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights, (212) 923-3700, . (Johnson)
(through May 13) Impressionism, like fashion, is dedicated to the fleeting sensation: this moment¡¯s light, this season¡¯s dress. Yet the works in this exhibition, which transforms the Frick¡¯s mohair-upholstered East Gallery into a runway for Renoir¡¯s soign¨¦ Parisians, don¡¯t at first register as Impressionist. With their traditional portrait format and imposing scale, they seem at odds with the modest plein-air paintings that define the movement. Central among them is the Frick¡¯s own Renoir, ¡°La Promenade¡± (1875-6), in which a stylish young woman guides two equally well-dressed little girls along a public garden path. 1 East 70th Street, (212) 288-0700, . (Rosenberg)
(through April 29) Porcelain lovers will not want to miss this show of domestic ware made in Germany in the early 1700s, but the big news is the new wing, the Portico Gallery, that it inaugurates. The Frick has transformed an outdoor colonnade into an indoor exhibition space. Floor-to-ceiling windows enclose a long, narrow space that feels bigger and airier than its actual 850 square feet. In the small rotunda at one end, a life-size, nude Diana by Jean-Antoine Houdon looks out over the traffic on Fifth Avenue with divine indifference. 1 East 70th Street, (212) 288-0700, . (Johnson)
(through May 13) The postwar sculptor John Chamberlain, who died in December, manipulated crushed car parts into abstract clusters that are both gorgeous and terrifying. As installed on the Guggenheim Museum¡¯s curved ramps for this full-dress retrospective, they look, inevitably, like mangled wrecks on a speedway. Yet the show goes to great lengths to extricate Mr. Chamberlain from what he called ¡°the car-crash syndrome.¡± It includes work made from foam, aluminum foil, paper and plexiglass, and it emphasizes the collage process behind the metal sculptures rather than the material that went into them. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, (212) 423-3500, . (Rosenberg)
(through June 13) Francesca Woodman, the photographer who at 22 took her own life, in 1981, is as close to a true saint as the putatively secular world of contemporary art can claim. The dreamy, formally playful and disarmingly erotic pictures she made ¡ª mostly of herself partly unclothed or naked ¡ª project a self surrendering unreservedly to the spirit of art. Viewing this riveting survey of her sadly abbreviated career, it is hard to shake off the admittedly absurd notion that she was too pure an artist for this muddy world. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, (212) 423-3500, . (Johnson)
(through May 6) Richard and Mildred Loving, an interracial couple from Virginia whose marriage prompted a benchmark 1967 Supreme Court ruling overturning state miscegenation laws, are portrayed not as political activists, but as political heroes who fell into history by accident. The story began on July 11, 1958, when a Virginia county sheriff and two deputies entered the Lovings¡¯ bedroom at 2 a.m. and arrested them, saying they had violated the Racial Integrity Act. Mr. Villet¡¯s images represent the heyday of social documentary, but also the midcentury photo-essay format. Ms. Loving later became a conscious activist when, on the 40th anniversary of the Supreme Court ruling, she made a statement supporting the right to marry, whether ¡°black or white, young or old, gay or straight.¡± 1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43rd Street, (212) 857-0000, . (Schwendener)
(through Sept. 2) From the home of Weegee¡¯s voluminous archive, the latest exhibition about this great documentary photographer (1899-1968) revisits his frenetic, formative first decade of work, starting in 1935, when his often sensational images of murder and mayhem appeared in New York¡¯s daily newspapers. His penchant for self-promotion, the work of his competitors and peers, the evolution of tabloid journalism and the great city that was both his subject and his audience are emphasized, with fresh curatorial precision and deftly used touch screens. 1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43rd Street, (212) 857-0000, . (Roberta Smith)
(through June 10) This beautiful, surprising and sociologically intriguing exhibition reveals how Japanese artists, designers and craftsmen cultivated their own version of Art Deco, that excruciatingly suave style of art, design and d¨¦cor that prevailed in Europe and America during the 1920s and ¡¯30s. The 200 paintings, sculptures, ceramics, glassware, jewelry, fashion and printed ephemera on display seamlessly blend East and West and old and new. You could almost believe it was the Japanese who invented Art Deco. 333 East 47th Street, (212) 832-1155, . (Johnson)
(through July 29) After earning a master of fine arts at Yale in 2001, Kehinde Wiley began exhibiting his large, figurative oil-on-canvas portraits of young black men in hip-hop apparel. With their emphasis on bright, acid colors and ghetto-fabulous outfits, the paintings borrowed heavily from the work of Barkley Hendricks, although Mr. Wiley¡¯s contribution was to push things in a more bombastic direction, hijacking the format of old master portraits. Mr. Wiley¡¯s work hasn¡¯t changed much over the last decade, although his scope has gone global. This exhibition, which focuses on Ethiopian Israeli Jews, is shown alongside historic paper cuts and textile works he selected from the museum¡¯s collection. The result is a fusion of Pattern and Decoration painting with figuration, a mash-up or sampling of historical styles and references. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, (212) 423-3337, . (Schwendener)
(through July 8) Concluding the Met¡¯s series of Byzantine art blockbusters, this show tells the story of the Byzantine Empire in the Eastern Mediterranean, from Syria through Egypt and across North Africa, as it made contact with (and lost ground to) the emerging Islamic world between the seventh and ninth centuries. Loans from Egypt could not be secured, because of the continuing turmoil of the Arab Spring, but important pieces from Jordan, Greece and Georgia are among the show¡¯s highlights. (212) 535-7710, . (Rosenberg)
(through Sept. 9) This resonant, illuminating if sometimes fraught exhibition traces the progress of the naked, mostly female body through photography from its early years nearly to the present with some 90 images, all owned by the Met. In works variously artistic, erotic, scientific, ethnographic, forensic and experimental, we see a medium stretched by human use and imagination. The male gaze is often relentless, but as time passes, individual faces, personalities and relationships come into focus on all sides; consciousness rises and oppressiveness decreases, which is a relief. (212) 535-7710, . (Smith)
(through May 20) This lovely small show, focused on self-portrait paintings and prints, proposes that Rembrandt was a greater influence on Degas than has generally been recognized. Degas as a young man studied Rembrandt prints, copied at least one and made others imitating Rembrandt-type effects. But a group of four captivating self-portraits at the heart of the show ¡ª two by each artist painted at age 23 ¡ª suggests that the men were temperamentally about as alike as a cat and a dog. (212) 535-7710, . (Johnson)
(through May 20) This late, magnificently plain-spoken self-portrait finds the artist in his studio, brush and palette in hand, contemplating his homely visage. Surrounded by, and generally overshadowing, several of the Met¡¯s own Rembrandts, it is among the high points of European painting, not the least for the pale background wall where two drawn circles echo, abstractly and much enlarged, the painter¡¯s intent gaze. Its emotional gravity and psychic complexity underscore why Rembrandt is often likened to Shakespeare in his epoch-changing grasp of human interiority. (212) 535-7710, . (Smith)
(through Aug. 26) This exhibition of 17 contemporary works inspired by museums doesn¡¯t mention Theodor Adorno by name, but it nods toward his ideas in a wall text, which jokes that artists often see museums as ¡°mausoleums, places where art goes to die.¡± Andrea Fraser¡¯s video ¡°Museum Highlights: A Gallery Talk¡± (1989) leans toward the anti-museum view, while a 16mm film by Nashashibi/Skaer, the duo of British artists Rosalind Nashashibi and Lucy Skaer, made by gliding through the Met in the dark with a camera and a flash strobe, treats the museum like a darkened crypt. Lutz Bacher¡¯s video offers another museum tour, while the museum appears in poetically distorted form in photographs by John Pilson, Tim Davis and Lothar Baumgarten. (212) 535-7710, . (Schwendener)
(through June 3) Like the family it chronicles, this exhibition is fragmented and contentious, with flashes of brilliance. It explores the closely intertwined collections of the siblings Leo, Gertrude and Michael Stein (and Michael¡¯s wife, Sarah), casting these wealthy American expatriates as ahead-of-the-curve art patrons whose tastes and social networks shaped Modernism as we know it. And it shows Matisse and Picasso vying for the Steins¡¯ attention. Highlights include Matisse¡¯s Fauvist ¡°Woman With a Hat¡± and, naturally, Picasso¡¯s proto-cubist portrait of Gertrude. (212) 535-7710, . (Rosenberg)
(through May 6) An uncannily contemporary sense of fluidity, action and emotion courses throughout this captivating exhibition, which traces the Japanese penchant for narrative through hand scrolls, hanging scrolls and books, on to the expanded field of folding screens. The sublime 13th-century ¡±Illustrated Legends of the Kitano Tenjin Shrine¡± ¡ª five hand scrolls never before shown together ¡ª is a must-see. And the show¡¯s second rotation of fragile treasures is every bit as good as the first, perhaps better, with even more in the way of radiant color and an added demon or two. Return visits are rewarded. (212) 535-7710, . (Smith)
(through April 30) ¡°My Best Thing,¡± a 99-minute film that Los Angeles presented at the 2011 Venice Biennale, features digitally animated, childlike figures isolated on green-screen backgrounds. In computer-generated voices, they candidly converse about art, literature and sex to improbably engaging effect. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, (718) 784-2084, . (Johnson)
(through July 1) Flavin (1933-96) is so closely identified with his signature medium, the fluorescent light sculpture, that a show of his drawings is bound to surprise. And it¡¯s particularly exciting to find that he was not only a devoted draftsman but also a freewheeling polymath on paper. The Morgan¡¯s show includes drawings from Flavin¡¯s personal collection, which encompasses Hokusai, Mondrian and the Hudson River School and will completely change the way you see his art. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, (212) 685-0008, Ext. 560, . (Rosenberg)
(through April 29) You won¡¯t see much of Rembrandt in this exhibition of about 90 works on paper, which includes just four drawings attributed to that master. What the show lacks in star power, though, it makes up for with a keen, all-encompassing look at life in the Dutch Republic during its Golden Age (which corresponds, roughly, to the 17th century). Seascapes assert naval dominance; genre scenes show bustling markets and tipsy taverngoers; botanical illustrations tell cautionary tales about economic speculation. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, (212) 685-0008, Ext. 560, . (Rosenberg)
(through May 6) The city¡¯s premier museum of Latin culture explores its holdings in urban folk art, so-called handicraft and other forms of vernacular expression and comes up with visual gold. Among the kaleidoscopic displays are Puerto Rican santos and the winsome cellophane animals, birds and insects of Gregorio Marz¨¢n (1906-97). Splendid textiles include Haitian voodoo banners; densely appliqu¨¦d molas and the patchwork scenes called arpilleras, with which Chilean women kept hope alive for disappeared relatives during the regime of Augusto Pinochet. An intoxicating, if sometimes bittersweet, vitality is revealed. 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, East Harlem, (212) 831-7272, . (Smith)
(through Aug. 12) From the department of unsolicited advice for aspiring artists: avoid dust, dirt, ashes, soot, smoke, sand, mud and lint, especially if you want to make a statement about life, death, history and the ephemerality of it all. The dangers are well-illustrated in this 25-artist show. While formally various, almost every piece trades on stereotypical associations with the entropic end to which we all are destined. 2 Columbus Circle, (212) 299-7777, (Johnson)
(through July 9) This entertaining little show includes five products of the Surrealist parlor game ¡°exquisite corpse¡± and rustles up other examples of distorted or disjointed figuration from MoMA¡¯s permanent collection. There¡¯s much here to amuse, provoke and titillate, though the curators don¡¯t include more performance-based forms of collaboration. (212) 708-9400, . (Rosenberg)
(through May 14) ¡°Print/Out¡± presents printed works by 40 artists and artist groups from the museum¡¯s permanent collection. Produced over the past two decades, most involve public modes of address borrowed from the worlds of advertizing and design and concepts promoting critical suspicion of mainstream media, culture and society. ¡°Printin¡¯,¡± a related print-focused exhibition, is full of surprises addressing multiple aspects of human experience. With fearless eclecticism, it ranges from a Krazy Kat cartoon by George Herriman to Puritan stocks cut from cardboard by Cady Noland. (212) 708-9400, . (Johnson)
(through May 14) This show reunites five of the eight free-standing frescoes that Rivera made for a 1931-2 exhibition at MoMA. Some of these paintings seem ripped from current headlines. In ¡°The Uprising,¡± protesting laborers are brutally suppressed by uniformed soldiers; the stratified New York cityscape of ¡°Frozen Assets¡± tops a bank vault with a crowded homeless shelter. Timely as they are, they lack the multitudinous energy and narrative sweep of Rivera¡¯s permanently sited murals. (212) 708-9400, . (Rosenberg)
(through June 11) Aided by ever-shifting arrays of costumes, wigs, makeup, props, masks and prosthetic body parts, the leading light of postmodern photo-based art spent nearly four decades turning photography against itself, laying waste to a lexicon of mostly female stereotypes and exposing both the tyranny and the inner lives of the images of women that bombard and shape us all at every turn. This retrospective could have been larger, more clearly organized and less familiar, but its strengths, like the achievement it honors, are undeniable. (212) 708-9400, . (Smith)
(through April 22) A British dandy in the Wildean mold, Beaton photographed fashion for Vogue and Vanity Fair; made photographic portraits of rich, famous and glamorous people; drew and painted cartoons, caricatures, fashion illustrations and theatrical sets with a deft hand; published six volumes of his diaries; and won two Oscars for his costume and set designs, for the Hollywood movies ¡°Gigi¡± and ¡°My Fair Lady.¡± He spent much time in New York, and this entertaining exhibition surveys what he did here during his five-decade career. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, (212) 534-1672, . (Johnson)
(through April 22) The second edition of this survey of young talent, organized by Eungie Joo, is more international than the last one, with artists from Asia and South America and collectives from Africa and the Middle East. Much of the work is made up of small, light formal gestures, unemphatic in tone and socially engaged, though in an unperturbed way that accommodates friendliness and wit. There is also a schedule of performances on- and off-site. An Israeli collective, Public Movement, will stage topical debates around town. Yet another collective, House of Natural Fiber, from Indonesia, plans to demonstrate technology for producing alcoholic beverages and electronic music simultaneously. 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, (212) 219-1222, . (Holland Cotter)
(through April 22) Several artists suggest their visions for the future of Long Island City, ranging from site-specific to silly. Natalie Jeremijenko¡¯s ¡°feral robots¡± sniff out pollutants in contaminated soil, and she suggests hula hoops filled with wildflower seeds. Rirkrit Tiravanija proposes growing ¡°drivable¡± grass along a section of Broadway, and Mary Miss focuses on four giant smokestacks that tower over the area and imagines them as an eco-feedback center registering environmental changes visible to the community. 9-01 33rd Road, at Vernon Boulevard, Long Island City, Queens, (718) 204-7088, . (Schwendener)
(through May 27) With remarkable clarity of vision, striking spatial intelligence and a generous stylistic inclusiveness, one of the best Whitney Biennials in recent memory confidently weaves together art objects and time-based art ¡ª dance, theater and performance as well as film and video ¡ª on a scale unprecedented in New York. So doing, this especially poetic incarnation also reinvents the museum¡¯s signature show and places future biennial curators in its debt, while offering the out-of-control, money-saturated art world a bit of redemption. Visit early and often. (212) 570-3600, . (Smith)

(through April 21) This latest series by the British photographer Paul Graham was shot entirely in high-traffic areas of Manhattan (Penn Station, Times Square and 125th Street, among others). Its 16 diptychs and 2 triptychs have a simple premise: They show two or three views of the same intersection, taken seconds apart and from more or less the same angle. People go out of focus or disappear entirely and are replaced by new pedestrians doing pretty much the same thing. Cabs speed by, cellphone conversations end, attentions are diverted and street photography is reinvented for an age of perpetual distraction. The Pace Gallery and Pace/MacGill, 545 West 22nd Street, (212) 989-4258, . (Rosenberg)
(through May 6) Made from detritus scavenged from the Kitchen¡¯s basement, Ms. Overton¡¯s Post-Minimalist sculptures generate an air of excruciatingly sophisticated decorum. On a squarish wall, a single, 17-foot-long pipe reaches diagonally from one corner to its opposite. Wedged between opposite walls, a set of eight scuffed white pedestals seems to levitate. The floor of one room is entirely covered by two-by-four scraps. Viewing these works is like browsing through an issue of Artforum magazine from about 1970. The Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, (212) 255-5793, . (Johnson)

(through April 24) Few have treated Monet¡¯s garden at Giverny as irreverently as the sculptor E. V. Day and the performance artist Kembra Pfaler, known for her signature look: naked body painted in lurid colors, dominatrix boots, Kiss-style makeup and giant mass of teased black hair. Here, Ms. Day¡¯s surreal photographs of Ms. Pfaler in costume posing against verdant backdrops at Giverny are displayed in an installation that replicates the garden in miniature, complete with grassy Astroturf, live flowers, gravel paths and a wooden bridge. The Hole Gallery, 312 Bowery, East Village, (212) 466-1100, . (Johnson)
(through April 20) Organized by the collective of anonymous artists known as the Bruce High Quality Foundation, this jampacked, multifloor exhibition displays paintings, sculptures, videos and more by close to 400 artists. A radically inclusive survey of what artists in New York really are doing outside the filtering systems of galleries, museums and curators, it is by turns exhilarating, numbing and depressing. Don¡¯t miss it. 159 Bleecker Street, at Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, . (Johnson)
(through April 22) In the mesmerizing video art of Oded Hirsch, who is now having his first solo exhibition in New York, the communal labors of the kibbutz become haunting performances. In the 10-minute ¡°50 Blue¡± (2009), a young man struggles to push an older man in a wheelchair through a swampy landscape to an elevated viewing platform. And in ¡°Tochka¡± (2010), men in blue shirts and white peasant hats cross a field and set to work on a mysterious construction project, which turns out to be a bridge to nowhere. Thierry Goldberg, 103 Norfolk Street, Lower East Side, (212) 967-2260, . (Rosenberg)
(through April 22) Sam Moyer¡¯s beguiling, expansive pictures oscillate astutely between the sublime and the decorative. Mounted on panels whose dimensions range from about 5 to 10 feet, they resemble much-enlarged, black-and-white, aerial photographs of mountainous topographies, possibly on another planet. They also are like giant, dark photocopies of profusely wrinkled bed sheets. But they are entirely made by hand. Rachel Uffner Gallery, 47 Orchard Street, near Hester Street, Lower East Side, (212) 274-0064, . (Johnson)
(through April 21) Conversations about art, movies, literature, philosophy and sex, and expressions of excitement accompanying simultaneous masturbation ¡ª all transcribed from Skype dialogues between Ms. Stark and anonymous Italian men ¡ª are video projected in two separate rooms, as lines of text accompanied by music. Prepare to be teased. Gavin Brown, 620 Greenwich Street, at Leroy Street, West Village, (212) 627-5258, z. (Johnson)

(through May 6) Two pristine, full-size oil pumps seemingly toiling away in an empty lot of the theater district are intended to raise alarm about waste and the environment, but mainly they exemplify Surrealist clich¨¦, highlight public sculpture¡¯s all-too frequent role as light entertainment and ¡ª highlighted with red on black ¡ª are presentable enough to appear on the Broadway stage, perhaps in an update of ¡°Oklahoma!¡± Eighth Avenue, at 46th Street, Clinton, (212) 966-0193, . (Smith)

(through April 29) This miraculous exhibition presents for the first time outside of Japan all the pieces of a famous suite of scroll paintings that Ito Jakuchu (1716-1800) created for a monastery in Kyoto. Three representing enthroned Buddhist deities are comparatively dull, but the 30 depicting flowers, trees, birds, insects, seashells and much more are astoundingly beautiful. Formally virtuosic and magically realistic, they will leave you helplessly enchanted. National Gallery of Art, Constitution Avenue NW, Washington, (202) 737-4215, . (Johnson)
(through April 29) This exhibition, organized by the Addison Gallery of American Art in Andover, Mass., reunites the Four Musketeers of New York painting: John Graham, Arshile Gorky, Stuart Davis and Willem de Kooning. For a time ¡ª the 1930s, give or take a few years ¡ª these artists linked arms to defend modern American art against the dreariness and insularity of the Depression. One might see this show as an expansion of the first few galleries of the Museum of Modern Art¡¯s recent de Kooning retrospective, with their eerie still lifes and fidgety figure paintings that seemed to collapse abstraction and representation. Purchase College, State University of New York, 735 Anderson Hill Road, Purchase, N.Y., (914) 251-6100, . (Rosenberg)
(through April 22) In 2001 Ms. Strauss came up with an unusual idea for an exhibition. It would take place under an elevated section of Interstate 95, in her home city, Philadelphia, and would consist of photographs mounted on the columns that supported the highway. It would be a recurring event, appearing yearly over a decade, and would be free and accessible to the public. That series, ¡°I-95,¡± is at the core of ¡°Zoe Strauss: Ten Years,¡± an engaging, parameter-expanding exhibition at the Philadelphia Museum of Art and on billboards around the city. In it, the highway links sweeping literary ambition and local interest, lyrical and documentary photography, portraiture and the urban landscape. Benjamin Franklin Parkway and 26th Street, (215) 763-8100, . (Rosenberg)
(through May 6) Nature both inspired van Gogh¡¯s extraordinary art and calmed his perpetually jangled nerves, and this modest yet groundbreaking show of 45 often small, unfamiliar canvases ¡ª devoted almost entirely to landscapes ¡ª examines his crucial connection to its bounty. The selection cuts a narrow, well-organized path through his art, examining the terrains he painted, the often close-up viewpoints he used and the shifting topographies of his paint textures, leading us to the fullness of his achievement along a fresh and eye-opening route. 26th Street at Benjamin Franklin Parkway, (215) 763-8100, . (Smith)
(through May 6) The focus on Bonnard, Vuillard and a few other post-Impressionists ¡ª among the earliest adopters of the hand-held camera ¡ª brings some order to an unwieldy topic: the competitive relationship between painting and photography at the dawn of the 20th century. And throughout this exhibition¡¯s more than 200 photographs and 70 paintings, prints and drawings press us to think about our own fast-changing photographic culture. (You wonder what these artists would have done with Instagram.) 1600 21st Street NW, Washington, (202) 387-2151, . (Rosenberg)

(closes on Friday) Unfamiliar landscape prints by familiar names ¡ª mainly Katsushika Hokusai and Utagawa Hiroshige ¡ª dominate this lavish show, and their superb condition has kept the colors strikingly vivid. The grandly descriptive can turn grandly abstract on a dime, especially when Hokusai tackles waterfalls in vertical formats. Also noteworthy are the prints of his lesser-known contemporary Keisai Eisen, whose inclination to give tumbling water the solidity of nearby rocks has a bracing visionary force. Joan B. Mirviss, 39 East 78th Street, (212) 799-4021, . (Smith)
(closes on Saturday) Of all the 1980s Pictures artists, few have turned out to be as dedicated as Sarah Charlesworth to photography¡¯s traditional methods or to the notion of beauty in the purely contemplative, almost neo-Classical sense. This serene show sums up her breadth of vision with an impressive, almost narrative sequence of images that encompass and blur the boundaries among postmodern appropriation, pristine close-ups of the studio and semi-abstract still lifes that meditate on optics and the glories of light and form. Susan Inglett, 522 West 24th Street, Chelsea, (212) 647-9111, . (Smith)
(closes on Saturday) The astounding work of Bourmond Byron, Wesner La Forest, Peterson Laurent and Odilon Pierre confirms once more the extraordinary achievement of 20th-century Haitian painting, while elucidating the overheated mixture of everyday life, voodoo faith, incessant turmoil and Edenic nature basic to its fervent plasticity. It is as rare to see these artists¡¯ efforts in such quantity as it is frustrating to continue to wonder when they will be accorded a place in the history of mainstream modernism. Edward Thorp Gallery, 210 11th Avenue, at 25th Street, Chelsea, (212) 691-6565, . (Smith)
(closing on Sunday) This wide-ranging survey was assembled by one of the leading milliners in Britain and draws heavily on the incomparable collection of the Victoria and Albert Museum. It includes fascinating historical material; a survey of 20th- and 21st-century headgear at its most creative (and often most frivolous); and rather too many efforts by the show¡¯s organizer. But what¡¯s good is great: for example, a platterlike feather number from 18th-century London. Bard Graduate Center: Decorative Arts, Design History, Material Culture, 18 West 86th Street, (212) 501-3000, . (Smith)
(closes on Sunday) Named for the glowing skies that accrue near mountains because of extremes of temperature and humidity, this show is dominated by three large striped wall pieces made of nothing but white packing tape and brightly colored grosgrain ribbon. They implicate the gallery space by adjusting noticeably to prevailing climatic conditions: the tape curls or uncurls, and that makes all the difference. Rarely has the divide between Minimalism and Post-Minimalism ¡ª or Donald Judd and John Cage ¡ª been finessed with such elegance and economy. Showroom 170, 170 Suffolk Street, near Houston Street, Lower East Side, (646) 559-2856, . (Smith)
(closes on Saturday) This resourceful performance artist, who is aided by an array of backdrops, costumes, props, materials and whatever ideas spring to anyone¡¯s mind, shows the environmental artwork that he wrought earlier in the exhibition by culling images from the photo sessions and decoupaging them, downsized and tinted, to whatever strikes his fancy. Elizabeth Dee Gallery, 545 West 20th Street, Chelsea, (212) 924-7545, . (Smith)
(closes on Sunday) Serene on the surface but less so underneath, the museum¡¯s first full-dress retrospective of a 20th-century Chinese painter is as much about history as art history. It focuses on an artist, teacher and art historian who helped preserve the ancient tradition of ink painting and then struggled to make it relevant under the Communists, bending it toward propaganda, introducing a new degree of realism and making frequent use of the color red. While fascinating, the show leaves you wondering what he might have accomplished under less encumbered circumstances. (212) 535-7710, . (Smith)
(closes on Saturday) In her latest series, ¡°High School Football,¡± the photographer Catherine Opie doesn¡¯t seem to know what to do with this all-American, ¨¹ber-masculine subject. Taken all over the country, her images run the gamut from action shots, to sentimental ¡°Friday Night Lights¡±-style views of the field and bleachers, to landscapes in which the game seems incidental. There are portraits of warrior-faced young men in their team uniforms, too, which turn out to be a pretty effective defense against emotional candor. Mitchell-Innes & Nash, 534 West 26th Street, Chelsea, (212) 744-7400, . (Rosenberg)
(closes on Sunday) Henry Ossawa Tanner (1859-1937) was the first African-American artist to achieve international fame in modern times. After permanently expatriating to France in 1891, he found success as a painter of luminous pictures of biblical subjects. In this informative survey of his career, one piece stands out: an Annunciation in which the angel Gabriel appears to Mary as a burst of yellow light. It is a painting of amazing grace. 118 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, (215) 972-7600, . (Johnson)
(closes on Saturday) Ranging from a first-century B.C. silver harness ornament depicting a winged stallion to bevies of gold hair ornaments depicting dragons, birds and flowers from the 10th to 14th centuries (Liao, Northern Song and Song dynasties), this exhibition provides a rare in-depth at ceremonial and luxury objects. Forms, purposes, techniques and surface decoration vary tremendously and to illuminating effect. Standouts include a chased silver Liao dynasty funeral mask and a Song pictorial dish engraved with a marvelous landscape scene of scholars drifting in a boat. Instructive pleasures abound. J. J. Lally & Co. Oriental Art, 41 East 57th Street, (212) 371-3380, . (Smith)
(closes on Sunday) Organized by the curator, art-restitution lawyer and salon hostess Pati Hertling, this group show was ¡°conceived of in the wake of the #occupywallstreet movement and the Republican primaries,¡± the news release says. Its themes of struggle and resistance play out on the level of process, as in an ambitious architectural intervention by Oscar Tuazon and Elias Hansen and in Klara Liden¡¯s overhead shot of a graffiti-etched picnic table. 18 Wooster Street, SoHo, (212) 925-2035, . (Rosenberg)
(closes on Saturday) Mr. Winters¡¯s new, vigorously painted abstractions are ravishing. As if to defend against anti-hedonist judgment, he also offers a series of notebook collages combining scientific and quasi-scientific imagery in Matthew Marks¡¯s small exhibition space at 502 West 22nd Street. They are interesting, but the paintings of flickering, warping, spiraling and tunneling diamond patterns in hot and cool colors are the real trip. Matthew Marks Gallery, 522 and 502 West 22nd Street, Chelsea, (212) 243-0200, . (Johnson)
