WASHINGTON ¡ª On Christmas in 1980 a fifth-grade boy in Flushing, Queens, received his first computer, a Commodore VIC-20. It changed his life. A few months later, a third grader about 100 miles upstate, in Woodstock, also received his first computer, a Commodore VIC-20. It changed his life too.
The kid in Queens was Chris Melissinos, curator of the path-breaking new exhibition opening here on Friday at the . The boy in Woodstock was me.
That happened a lot back then. The dawn of the 1980s, the beginning of the Reagan years, was just about the moment when aspirational middle-class families began buying computers for their children rather than bound encyclopedias. And for plenty of those children the main purpose of those early computers was games: typing in, debugging, playing and sometimes even creating their own.
We, the first generation to grow up with computers and video games, are hitting 40 now. We¡¯re still playing video games. But we are also having children. We are approaching some semblance of middle-aged respectability (however reluctantly). The traditional institutions of business, government and culture are gradually becoming our own.
One of us will eventually become the first president of the United States to grow up playing video games, the way Bill Clinton represented the first generation to grow up listening to rock ¡¯n¡¯ roll. But we¡¯re not quite there yet. In the meantime we can celebrate our favorite hobby¡¯s successful assimilation into the mainstream of American life with ¡°The Art of Video Games.¡±
Last year video games full First Amendment recognition as a protected form of human expression. Now the Smithsonian, the nation¡¯s official education and research institute, has decreed our little bleeps and bloops worthy of its hallowed granite and marble, quite literally down the hall from paintings and sculptures that define the country¡¯s cultural heritage.
But triumphalism of video games as an art form against the inevitable howls from those who dismiss the notion is not the mood of the exhibition, which would more accurately be characterized as self-consciously meek. ¡°The Art of Video Games¡± is a sanitized, uncontroversial and rigorously unprovocative introduction to the basic concepts of video games ¡ª which was, quite clearly, the point.
In interviews this week both , the curator, and , the museum¡¯s director, said they were acutely aware that the big deal with ¡°The Art of Video Games¡± was merely having a video game exhibition at the Smithsonian at all. With that in mind they tried to strip from the show any strong point of view or deep sense of curatorial perspective and interpretation.
Instead, they have presented a basic survey for people who don¡¯t play games (and their children), which is all that one could reasonably expect of an exhibition in this particular time and place. ¡°The Art of Video Games¡± does not represent the brash young cultural newcomer kicking in the doors of officialdom, belching loudly and declaring that he is taking over. Rather, it represents a humble penitent carefully putting on his least-threatening outfit and being allowed to take a place in the corner.
But hey, at least we¡¯re through the door now. Once the grown-ups get used to having us in here, we can start to get frisky. There will be a time when museums spend brainpower putting together deeply intelligent exhibitions on representations of violence in video games or on depictions of women in the games of various cultures. Exhibitions will explore the emotional impact of modes of storytelling in games. In other words, museums will one day bring the same intellectual attention to the substantive meaning of video game exhibitions as they do for, say, painting exhibitions.
Not yet, though.
Five important games, including Pac-Man and Myst, are playable at the exhibition. But the core of ¡°The Art of Video Games¡± is a display of 20 computer and gaming systems and short films explaining the relevance of four games on each of those platforms ¡ª 80 total. (The exhibition does not include a VIC-20 but does feature its successor, the Commodore 64.) In a nod to the interactivity of games, and an eager abdication of full curatorial control, the museum asked the public to vote on what would be displayed, choosing from among three options in each of four categories on each system, called Action, Target, Adventure and Tactics.
The purpose is to use these categories to demonstrate how games have become more sophisticated over the decades while also retaining common core elements. So while an Action game once meant Pac-Man or Donkey Kong, it now means or . You can see the Adventure category evolve from Pitfall! in 1982 to in 2010. It is an effective device, conveying both the technical and the narrative growth of the form.
The organizers were clear in interviews that they were not claiming to offer a list of the 80 most important video games. And it is good that they were not, because the selection leaves huge holes in any reasonable history of games. Tetris, for example, perhaps the most universal electronic game of all time, makes no appearance. Pong? Nope. Sports games? Nope. There aren¡¯t even any traditional arcade consoles or any mention of the emergence of arcade culture. There is almost nothing said about the Internet or mobile games.
The exhibition presents four games for the PlayStation 2, the best-selling home game console in history, without mentioning the game that defined that machine, the profane and violent III. In fact none of (or the other masterpiece from , ) were included even as options for voters. For an exhibition that wants to demonstrate the deep storytelling and characterization in games, their absence is unfathomable.
But for a presentation that wants to avoid raising any hackles or piquing any concern, it makes sense. This is ultimately a ¡°just happy to be here¡± exhibition, and an excellent one at that.
Likewise, it is easy to understand why the Smithsonian American Art Museum does not point out that half of the 80 featured games were primarily made in Japan. There are actually more Japanese games than American games in the main part of the exhibition. (A few are Canadian and European productions.) This question of why American consumers have flocked to Japanese games when they turn up their noses to almost all cultural imports beyond British rock bands is not one that the museum appears eager to raise.
Yet these are all the cavils of someone who, like Mr. Melissinos, has spent decades playing video games. And like Mr. Melissinos I recognize why this exhibition must be as it is: Video games are just now, finally, earning the validation of our parents¡¯ generation. We have now seen our treasured game systems go from under the Christmas trees of our youth to under glass at the Smithsonian.
It feels good.
