
The idea that bachata, the Dominican romantic style, is a closed circuit, almost impossible to crack by new talent, is given a new dose of credence with the emergence of Vena, a young supergroup made up of Steve Styles, who was the lead singer of Xtreme, and the brothers Lenny and Max Santos, who were the musical heart ¡ª guitar and bass ¡ª of Aventura, the genre¡¯s juggernaut. Vena is arriving in the shadow of the tremendous solo success of Aventura¡¯s frontman, Romeo Santos, who recently sold out multiple nights at Madison Square Garden. (That group¡¯s fourth member, Henry Santos, a cousin of Romeo, also recently released a smooth solo album on Siente.) But Vena is a genuine force, making bachata that feels at least a hair more mindful of the genre¡¯s folk roots than Aventura¡¯s epic pop. The aching is the best of the group¡¯s three singles. Mr. Styles sounds more comfortable here than in his Xtreme days, cradled in particular by Lenny Santos¡¯s guitar, which feels nimble and alive.

Ka¡¯s second album ¡°Grief Pedigree¡± (Iron Works) just hangs there, damp and foreboding, unerringly still. It doesn¡¯t flinch. There may be no calmer album this year, and no more unsettling one either. From Brownsville in Brooklyn, Ka was briefly a member of the mid-1990s underground hip-hop crew Natural Elements, but he¡¯s far better as an ¨¦minence grise than he was as an upstart. He¡¯s a striking rapper largely for what he forgoes: flash, filigree, any sense that the hard work is already done. He produced the album himself, keeping it spare. Most of it sounds lonely: ¡°Decisions¡± echoes Lou Reed¡¯s ¡°Walk on the Wild Side.¡± The most bracing moments here reframe ¡¯90s New York crime rap as an act of desperation and need, not of boasting and threat. In a few places Ka refers to literal hunger (¡°Trying to put food in my young tummy¡±) and given that, the pacing of his rhymes makes sense: he¡¯s running on fumes. is the best example of that, staggering to devastating end: ¡°I admit, not from an environment that let a child flourish/In the street, slim physique, wild courage/Five deep, trying to eat, looking malnourished.¡±

That ¡°Nothing to Do¡± (Iamsound), the first album from the Australian outfit Bleeding Knees Club, comes a couple years too late for the no-fi garage-rock revival hardly matters. It¡¯s raggedy and satisfying, unconcerned with anything beyond its very elemental attitudes and poses. The singer and drummer Alex Wall is bratty and petulant, whining about lust and ennui when he¡¯s not whining about the inconsequential:
Got in my car
Didn¡¯t get too far
You forgot your bag
It was such a drag.
The album is produced by Devont¨¦ Hynes (Blood Orange, Lightspeed Champion), who plays bass ¡ª and keyboards on ¡°Beach Slut,¡± which includes the album¡¯s most wistful passages ¡ª but otherwise mostly stays out of the way, letting Mr. Wall and the guitarist Jordan Malane outsneer each other. The blissful sounds like the soundtrack of a 1950s instructional video about the proverbial bad seed, and on ¡°Nothing to Do¡± Mr. Wall himself is the bad seed, griping, ¡°Got nothing to do/When I¡¯m with you/I¡¯m so bored you have no clue.¡±

The vocals are haunted and dreamlike on Jai Paul¡¯s new single, the guitars slow and plangent. ¡°Jasmine,¡± oozing a moist Prince-era sensuality, is less a song than a vamp, but what a spectacular vamp. In a short time Jai Paul, who appears content releasing one song every year or so, has demonstrated a gift for submerged, teasing, early-1980s-redolent soul. His first single, 2010¡¯s ¡°BTSTU¡± ¡ª used so effectively by Drake last year as the base of his song ¡°Dreams Money Can Buy¡± ¡ª was elegiac and slithery. ¡°Jasmine¡± is more vague, a whispery caress that rolls out deliberately, adding in sharp percussion, lazy bass, bracing shards of digital noise and more but never really resolving. It sort of melts away, a tingling memory.

As ever, dancehall songs take several months to crawl up from Jamaica and infiltrate the American consciousness. Popcaan¡¯s now experiencing its crossover moment, is already months old, but its sweetness hasn¡¯t faded. It¡¯s a syrupy love song, and Popcaan has a smooth voice with a hint of shrillness, and a casual manner, never oversinging the sentiment. (There¡¯s also a remix featuring Busta Rhymes in full patois mode.) ¡°Only Man She Want¡± is buried deep on ¡°Yiy Change,¡± the new mixtape by Popcaan (available at ), more of an afterthought than an advertisement. Maybe that¡¯s because there¡¯s much better material here: the lazy roots-reggae toast ¡°Weedy,¡± the bawdy come-on ¡°Back It Up,¡± the bruising ¡°Nuh Box Pon Jaw,¡± and remixes of older hits like ¡°Ravin,¡± delivered here over the guttural beat from Tyga¡¯s ¡°Rack City.¡± Throughout Popcaan shows off his tough side, and his ease with comic timing and phrasing ¡ª other parts of his personality that should trickle north soon enough.
?
