NRITYAGRAM, India
FEB. 20 was President¡¯s Day in the United States, but in India it is the day when the god Shiva is honored as Nataraja, Lord of the Cosmic Dance. Innumerable sculptures, going back over at least 11 centuries, depict him balanced on one bent leg. And the placing of each of his limbs signifies a different aspect of his mastery of the elements of existence.
Movement has long pervaded Indian thought. Dance here is a vivid element in religion, mythology, philosophy and art. Although I have spent over 35 years following dance in the West, a four-week visit to India in February made me feel that only now have I witnessed dance where it is truly central to culture.
Nowhere more so than in the disciplined utopia of Nrityagram, a village far from the madding crowd that is completely given over to the pursuit of dance. The village¡¯s company, the Nrityagram Dance Ensemble, is a lustrous exemplar of Odissi, one of India¡¯s classical dance forms. Ever since Nrityagram¡¯s first New York season in 1996 at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College, no Indian dancers have been better known in America. I stayed in this village for four days, observing round-the-clock rehearsals and classes as the company prepared for its latest tour, which on Tuesday brings it to the Joyce Theater for six days.
The road to Nrityagram (pronounced na-RIT-ya-gram) is an hour¡¯s drive west from Bangalore in the state of Karnataka. At one point during my journey a monkey remained seated in the road; the car had to swerve around him. At another, bends in the road revealed trees lighted up by astonishing eruptions of fiery orange flowers; they bear the appropriate name of ¡°Flames of the Forest.¡± In this temperate hill country the dancers and musicians (there is also a writers¡¯ colony) are used to working in studios open to the air without doors or windows; their buildings are surrounded by thrilling birdsong and flowering vegetation.
I had only been here an hour when the company¡¯s three permanent performers began talking enthusiastically about their several previous tours of America, their visits to the Edinburgh Festival and their time at the Joyce. The company¡¯s foreign travels do much to keep the village financially afloat; when the dancers go on a prolonged tour, the school and village simply close their gates. (After its run at the Joyce, the company makes stops in Louisiana, Iowa and Mexico and in April will offer workshops at the Mark Morris Studio in Brooklyn.)
Nrityagram was founded in 1990 as a gurukul, or residential village of learning, by the actress Protima Bedi. Though she died in 1998, her name is constantly invoked here. Her vivid personality and love affairs were one part of her legend, but another was her commitment to Indian classical dance, and in particular Odissi, of which she became by all accounts a compelling exponent. In essence Nrityagram remains as she had hoped: an idyllic place where it is not unusual for people to dance ¡ª usually with live musicians ¡ª morning, noon, and night.
India has no fewer than eight genres of dance that have been officially deemed classical (as well as innumerable folk forms). The country¡¯s complex political and social history, however, brought most of these forms close to extinction by the 1950s. Most of these idioms were connected to female temple dancers known as devadasis, a legendary caste surrounded in moral controversies (some were concubines, some were vowed to chastity, some dwindled into prostitution) and now virtually defunct. Though the classical dance forms today have become well established again, they¡¯ve been extensively reconstructed ¡ª and inevitably altered ¡ª during the last century.
Odissi, which came the closest to oblivion, derives from the state of Orissa on India¡¯s east coast; Karnataka, including Nrityagram, is southwest and largely inland. As a result a few Orissan purists assert that Nrityagram detaches the dance form from its home culture. The truth, however, is that the village¡¯s inception coincided with the worldwide spread of Odissi as a boom dance industry.
