Iceland could be a British isle or a Canadian province for Of Monsters and Men, the Icelandic band that headlined Webster Hall on Friday night. Of Monsters and Men connects two strains of Celtic-rooted music that spur robust, foot-stamping singalongs: the sea chantey and the arena-rock chorus, the folky and the anthemic. Its songs regularly ascend from guitar-strumming, accordion-tootling openings to brawny rock marches topped by la-las for the crowd to join, a strategy also used by Mumford & Sons, the Decemberists, Arcade Fire and, in decades past, the Scottish band Big Country.
It¡¯s a band in progress. Of Monsters and Men was founded in 2010 by the songwriter Nanna Bryndis Hilmarsdottir, who now shares lead vocals and songwriting with Ragnar Thorhallsson. With the song ¡ª in which a couple ponders reconciliation, loneliness and fear amid hearty shouts of ¡°Hey!¡± ¡ª the group won a national battle of the bands in Iceland in 2010 and received some early radio play in the United States. Its debut album, ¡°My Head Is an Animal,¡± appeared last year in Iceland, where it reached No. 1, and a version with added songs has just been released in the United States by Universal. Onstage the band has grown to seven members, including a trumpeter to underline each big finish.
The songs have more in mind than romance. Their Icelandic side comes through with lyrics (in English) that are steeped in fable and epic. They¡¯re full of sea voyages, mysterious animals, the possibility of disaster and the power of nature and fate. On the way to the chorus of ¡°Young Bones,¡± ¡°Hold on to your heart,¡± Mr. Thorhallsson sang:




In ¡°King and Lionheart¡± Ms. Hilmarsdottir sang about loyalty through war and apocalypse; ¡°Dirty Paws¡± envisioned a battle for the skies between the birds and the bees. Lions, tigers and wolves populate newer songs too, including the group¡¯s rousing encore, a song that hasn¡¯t been released,
The get to their anthem side more quickly ¡ª less skiffle and accordion, more march beats and trumpet ¡ª perhaps responding to larger crowds and clubs. Between songs Ms. Hilmarsdottir and Mr. Thorhallsson were modest and slightly incredulous at the response. They played an earnest version of the Cure¡¯s ¡°Close to You¡± as if they were working out the mechanics of arena rock. But the challenge for Of Monsters and Men will be to maintain the charm of its folky eccentricities, and to make sure those crescendos don¡¯t turn into a formula.
