


It¡¯s not every artist who seems intent on splitting the difference between the luminous serenity of Los Angeles Light and Space art and the sardonic analysis of art as commodity that gained force with 1980s Neo-Geo. But in her Pamela Rosenkranz comes as close as anyone to achieving this unlikely fusion.
The serenity is readily apparent in large fields of gleaming, slightly oozy white, seemingly trapped behind glass and a series of large, curved, freestanding sheets of pebbled Plexiglas, through which the rest of the show is distorted. There are also two large, brushy abstractions on paper, also framed under glass, and a couple of slightly irregular cardboard volumes painted a pale yellow: one on the floor; the other jutting out from the wall, suggesting a bulky room divider.
It is the back wall, painted a rather too pleasant shade of pale pink and the bright touch of turquoise just in front of it ¡ª a bottle of Gatorade on the floor ¡ª that sends you to the and the checklist for further guidance. These inform you that all the paint colors are really different shades of white latex from Ralph Lauren (the pink, for example, is called resort white); that those white framed works present nothing but quantities of an adhesive used to mount photographs; and that the brushy ones are mixtures of latex and soft drinks applied to photographs of fossils.
As for the painted cardboard boxes, they¡¯re from Ikea and contain unassembled furniture. So the Neo Geo connection is not so far off base, while Light and Space, and modernist abstraction in general, emerge more as a target.
The show¡¯s title, ¡°Because They Try to Bore Holes,¡± is a , complaining about birds puncturing his greatest work of art, the sky. He seems to exemplify an overblown artistic subjectivity that apparently does not sit well with Ms. Rosenkranz, whose work, according to the news release, ¡°collapses the potential meaning of an artwork to its meaningless material elements.¡±
Of course the viewer¡¯s subjectivity is the unknown variable in this equation. I still thought it was beautiful, but next time I¡¯ll be more careful.
