If you consider how far in advance artists are booked at major American orchestras, it did not take the New York Philharmonic long to schedule the fast-rising Dutch conductor ¡¯s debut with the orchestra , which took place on Thursday night at Avery Fisher Hall. Mr. van Zweden, an who came later to conducting, is not widely known in America. Now 51, he as the music director of the since 2008, and he brought the orchestra to Carnegie Hall last May for an as part of the Spring for Music Festival.
Mahler¡¯s popular First Symphony was the major work he chose for his Philharmonic debut. From the dynamic, all-out performance he conducted, it seems clear that he came to town determined to make music and make an impression. He did both on Thursday. If the performance was sometimes too feisty and intense, it was certainly exciting.
But before the Mahler, Mr. van Zweden showed his ability to work with a young virtuoso. The pianist made her subscription series debut with the Philharmonic in this program, having twice performed with the orchestra on the road in 2006. A with a flair for fashion, she has become a YouTube sensation.
Ms. Wang is not above virtuosic stunts, like her hyperfast rendition of But at her best, she is a thoughtful musician with an ear for color, texture and harmony.
For this debut she played a signature piece: Prokofiev¡¯s Third Piano Concerto, a formidably challenging Neo-Classical work. After the tranquil orchestral introduction, Ms. Wang jumped into the main section of the bustling first movement, tossing off the busy passagework with brio, dispatching bursts of chords and arm-blurring octaves with ease.
There were insightful musical touches in her playing, as in the grim episode with weighty chords that leads to a contrasting playful theme. Ms. Wang punched out those chords with steely sound, while also highlighting a sly inner voice.
Her tempos over all, especially in the finale, were brisk to the point of breathlessness. Mr. van Zweden provided consistent backing, but sometimes rhythmic details sounded rushed and clipped. In a performance of this work with Claudio Abbado and the Lucerne Festival Orchestra, available on a EuroArts DVD, Ms. Wang takes swift tempos, but Mr. Abbado reins her in just enough so that her playing has a little more grace and articulate rhythm. Yet Ms. Wang is a wonder. The audience stood and cheered her.
In the Mahler Mr. van Zweden put a higher priority on musical character and dramatic impact than on flawless execution and textured sound. In the first movement his muscular, insistent interpretation lacked the autumnal cast I associate with this music. In the second movement, a sort of hardy scherzo, Mr. van Zweden captured the heavy-footed, folk-dance spirit, though the playing was almost rigidly emphatic.
The slow movement, seemingly a funeral march, was very good, played with rustic character and just enough rawness to convey the implied parody. Mahler marks the opening of the finale ¡°With violent movement,¡± and for that, the kinetic Mr. van Zweden is your man. He drew blazing playing from the orchestra, which contrasted with the dreamy beauty of the lyrical midsection.
After the rousing brassy fanfare brought the piece to an end, the audience erupted in an ovation that rivaled Ms. Wang¡¯s, which is saying something.
