Danspace Project¡¯s black dance series Platform 2012: Parallels came to a close on Saturday. Near the end of the final program, the choreographer Ishmael Houston-Jones, who had served as curator for and its predecessor in 1982, listed what he could remember from the previous two months of Parallels performances. It was a conventional wrap-up, except that he did his reminiscing while lying sealed in a garbage bag.
He was in the bag for an hour (an escaped toe revealed a breathing hole), the last in a lineup of 12 performers who had consecutively inhabited St. Mark¡¯s Church for an hour each. With some overlap, that made for a nearly 10-hour event. I watched most of it, and this is some of what I remember.
The space was equipped with sculpture by : a wheelchair, a room divider on wheels, a chaise longue, a ladder suspended from a wire and more, all wrapped in tinseled rope to look both encrusted and sparkly, leftover and sublime. The performers used it all as furniture, rearranging it at will.
, who had conceived and organized the day¡¯s event, went first, donning a plastic goat head at one point, breathing through a harmonica at another. His dancing, in its eruptive brevity and drunken quality, was an introduction to much of the dancing that would follow.
Malcolm Low brought a friend, Simone Sobers. Theirs was one of the most dance-rich episodes, joyful and troubled and headlong, and it had the most moving finish: Mr. Low repeating the words ¡°Oh yes, yes¡± into Ms. Sobers¡¯s face until she cried.
Despite the plan she held and the timer, the self-possessed 12-year-old Willow Parchment looked like a child left home alone, with nothing particular to do except experiment with her parents¡¯ stuff. ¡°What if I did this?¡± she seemed to say, or ¡°Well, that didn¡¯t work.¡± In this respect many of her older colleagues resembled her.
Omagbitse Omagbemi, her face sometimes hidden by a scarf, shared the sense of experiment but made the setting seem foreign, a possibly dangerous place where she was a castaway. Souleymane Badolo ¡ª whose stamping, springing, rhythmic dancing was the day¡¯s most entertaining and also most prayerful ¡ª engaged most directly with the audience. Wearing a hoodie he played patty-cake with old women and invited kids to dance with him, thanking each with a little private dance ¡°just for you.¡±
With Okwui Okpokwasili, who had tubes hooked up to cups on her breasts, the exchange flowed in the other direction. She spent half her time doing vocal warm-ups, and a child in the audience echoed every single one. I cannot forget David Thomson, in black heels and a black latex ski mask, lifting up his dress to expose his bare buttocks, as they swiveled to James Brown¡¯s ¡°.¡±
Breasts, buttocks: the black body was on display, black identity occluded and teased and ignored. Mr. Houston-Jones, speaking into a microphone within his garbage bag, asked, ¡°What have we learned about black dance?¡± The only answer from the audience ¡ª ¡°It¡¯s not just Ailey¡± ¡ª could have come from the 1982 Parallels.
With great difficulty Mr. Houston-Jones wormed his way up onto the altar, arriving just before his time expired. He had a marvelous curtain line left for the day and for the series as a whole: ¡°Now what?¡±
