MADRID ¡ª The Spanish government approved a number of measures on Friday to crack down on tax fraud as part of its efforts to reassure investors that Madrid can replenish the public coffers by bringing to the surface some of the country¡¯s hidden wealth.
Spain¡¯s borrowing costs have soared since early March amid concerns about its ability to meet its latest deficit-cutting pledges, as well as worries about its banks¡¯ growing reliance on loans from the European Central Bank.
Jaime Garc¨ªa-Legaz, the Spanish secretary of state for the economy, told the Spanish television channel laSexta on Friday that Spain ¡°would be dead¡± without the loans provided by the European Central Bank.
To counter a deepening recession ¡ª the second in three years ¡ª the government of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy is hoping to bring out some of the revenue buried in an underground economy that was estimated by the previous government to represent about 20 percent of gross domestic product.
The efforts to combat fraud come on top of a squeeze of 27 billion euros, or $35 billion, in the central government¡¯s budget this year, as well as regulatory changes in labor markets and other areas.
As part of the measures approved at a cabinet meeting Friday, corporate cash transactions will be limited to 2,500 euros ($3,300), with fines as high as 25 percent of the transaction¡¯s value levied upon any transfers above the limit. Individuals and companies will also face sanctions beginning next year for failing to declare all assets held overseas.
¡°Every day the government is taking measures and launching reforms with the conviction that this situation will change,¡± Crist¨®bal Montoro, the budget minister, said at a press briefing.
The Spanish tax agency said that in its search for fraud, it had been more closely inspecting the circulation of high-denomination notes since 2007 amid concerns that the use in Spain of 500 euro notes was ¡°much higher than expected and much higher than what should correspond to the economic size of our country.¡± Since its inspections began, the agency said, it has unearthed 1.39 billion euros ($1.8 billion) of cash transactions made using high-denomination euro notes.
Use of 500 euro notes, worth about $657, is thought to have expanded considerably during Spain¡¯s construction boom as a way of paying for large ¡ª and sometimes undeclared ¡ª property transactions or building materials. Spaniards came to call the 500 euro notes ¡°bin Ladens¡±: everywhere and yet never seen.
Some economists have estimated that Spain accounted for about a quarter of the 500 euro notes circulating in the euro zone, though the European Central Bank does not provide a breakdown of issuance by country. The central bank also warns against drawing conclusions about cash circulation in a free-trade area.
Cayo Lara Moya, leader of the United Left party in Spain, argued during a parliamentary session this week that the government should push for the complete removal from the euro zone of 500 euro notes, one of the largest denominations used in Western economies.
Niels Bunemann, a spokesman for the central bank, said, ¡°It is not likely that an abolition of the 500 euro note would do anything to curb fraud or the black economy, as it would be easy for criminals to switch to the 200 euro bank notes for their activities.¡±
Juan Carlos Mart¨ªnez L¨¢zaro, a professor at the IE Business School in Madrid who has studied the underground economy, said the government¡¯s decision to restrict cash transactions ¡°isn¡¯t the magic solution but does make it harder to go ahead with a lot of undeclared transactions that now take place in cash.¡±
¡°We are in the painful context of rising taxes and spending cuts,¡± he added, ¡°so it¡¯s a very favorable moment to implement any measure that can be explained to people as part of efforts to create a fairer system where all are made to contribute.¡±
The crackdown on fraud also coincides with a controversial decision to have a partial amnesty for violators of tax laws, which the government hopes will raise 2.5 billion euros ($3.3 billion) in additional revenue.
Before it came to power, Mr. Rajoy¡¯s Popular Party had opposed the idea of such an amnesty, labeling it as unfair. But Luis de Guindos, the economy minister, defended it recently as ¡°an exceptional measure for exceptional times.¡±
Mr. Mart¨ªnez L¨¢zaro, the professor, said, ¡°A lot of people are angered by this fiscal amnesty on ethical grounds, but my view is that whatever doesn¡¯t get collected now will then have to be raised through more tax hikes or spending cuts.¡±
