With the economy slowly reviving, an executive from Atlas Van Lines recently visited Louisville, Ky., with good news: the company wanted to hire more than 100 truck drivers ahead of the summer moving season.
But a usually reliable source of workers, the local government-financed job center, could offer little help, because the federal money that local officials had designated to help train drivers was already exhausted. Without the government assistance, many of the people who would be interested in applying for the driving jobs could not afford the $4,000 classes to obtain commercial driver¡¯s licenses. Now Atlas is struggling to find eligible drivers.
Across the country, work force centers that assist the unemployed are being asked to do more with less as federal funds dwindle for job training and related services.
In Seattle, for example, the region¡¯s seven centers provided training for less than 5 percent of the 120,000 people who came in last year seeking to burnish their skills. And in Dallas, officials say they have annual funds left to support only 43 people in training programs, nowhere near enough to help the 23,500 people who have lost their jobs in the last 10 weeks alone.
The Labor Department announced on Friday that , a disappointing gain after three previous months of nearly twice that level. But with 12.7 million people still searching for jobs, the country is actually spending less on work force training than it did in good times.
Federal money for the primary training program for dislocated workers is 18 percent lower in today¡¯s dollars than it was in 2006, even though there are six million more people looking for work now. Funds used to provide basic job search services, like guidance on r¨¦sum¨¦s and coaching for interviews, have fallen by 13 percent.
Political fights have focused primarily on extensions of unemployment insurance, while the cuts in funds for training have passed with little debate and little notice.
At the peak in 2000, the federal government was spending more than $2.1 billion a year in today¡¯s dollars for training programs aimed at dislocated workers under the Workforce Investment Act. Stimulus funds added close to $1.5 billion over two years, but now annual spending has receded to about $1.2 billion.
The cuts ¡°make it harder to meet the employers¡¯ needs,¡± said Michael Gritton, executive director of KentuckianaWorks, which oversees four government-financed job centers in Louisville. ¡°And obviously you have these individual customers who are asking for help to climb back into the middle class and you can¡¯t help them either.¡±
Employers who want to hire often complain that the jobless do not have the necessary skills. In such an environment, advocates for workers say that cutting funds for training and other services makes little sense.
¡°We should be spending significantly more than we were spending five years ago,¡± said Andy Van Kleunen, executive director of the National Skills Coalition, a nonprofit group that promotes investment in training. ¡°And even then we would not be catching up to the demand.¡±
Jack Griffin, president and chief operating officer of the Atlas World Group, said that finding drivers should be easy given the national unemployment rate of over 8 percent. ¡°You would think they would be lined up at our door,¡± he said.
Atlas recently lowered the number of driving hours required and is offering a signing bonus of $3,000. Mr. Griffin said the company would consider training applicants itself if they would ¡°sign a piece of paper saying that when they graduate they will come to work for us for two years.¡±
To bolster training and other services for jobless workers, the Obama administration recently proposed consolidating two programs. The general dislocated worker program paid for under the Workforce Investment Act would be combined with the Trade Adjustment Assistance program, which provides training and other benefits to workers who lose their jobs because of foreign competition.
