Ford Motor, alone among America¡¯s Big Three automakers, staved off bankruptcy and survived the financial crisis. Its sales, profit and stock price have surged. Now it faces what may be an even tougher challenge: Can it save its faltering Lincoln brand?
Lincoln sales peaked in 1990 at over 200,000 vehicles. By last year, sales of Lincoln, Ford¡¯s luxury nameplate, had fallen to 85,643. Lincoln has lost ground to the perennial leaders Mercedes, BMW and Lexus, as well as to a resurgent Audi and a Detroit rival, Cadillac. It¡¯s even losing customers to Ford¡¯s own brands, as the revamped Taurus and critically praised new offer an array of traditional luxury features.
To reinvent Lincoln, Ford has focused on design to an unusual, perhaps unprecedented, degree. It lured a 40-year-old designer, Max Wolff, from Cadillac and has accorded him the star treatment more commonly associated with fashion designers on the Paris and Milan runways.
At the unveiling of the much-anticipated new in Manhattan¡¯s trendy Chelsea neighborhood last week, an energetic Mr. Wolff jumped onto the stage wearing a modish suit, dark shirt, no tie, and what looked like several days¡¯ growth of facial hair. He exuded a rakish charm enhanced by his Australian accent.
¡°This position is unique,¡± Mr. Wolff told me when I caught up with him and Ford¡¯s global marketing vice president, Jim Farley, at this week¡¯s , where a gleaming ¡°ruby red¡± Lincoln MKZ was on display a few feet away. ¡°I was hired to reinvent a storied brand,¡± Mr. Wolff said. ¡°I had a blank canvas. Jim hired me to be a provocateur. A chance like this probably comes along only once in a lifetime.¡±
Lincoln is indeed storied within design circles. When Ford recently acquired a rare , Mr. Wolff had the car moved to the new Lincoln design studio in Dearborn, where it served as inspiration for a new generation of Lincoln designers. In 1956, Lincoln sold the Mark II for a then-exorbitant $10,000, about the same price as a Rolls-Royce and twice that of a Cadillac. Fewer than 3,000 were built. A model once owned by Elvis Presley sold at a charity auction in 1999 for $250,000.
The most iconic Lincoln design may be , considered the masterwork of the legendary designer Elwood Engel, which was seared into the American consciousness as the car in which John F. Kennedy was riding when he was shot in Dallas. It shared with the Mark II an elegant simplicity that was a sharp departure from Detroit¡¯s recent taste for flamboyant tail fins. The 1961 Continental has attracted a cult following and has been featured in numerous films as well as the opening credits of the HBO series ¡°Entourage.¡±
¡°I look at the 1961 Continental and I see beautiful proportions, great details, elegant restraint, with just the right amount of chrome,¡± Mr. Wolff said. ¡°In that sense, there are some similarities. If you look at the MKZ, you¡¯ll see some of the same craftsmanship and detail, but it¡¯s very simple. There¡¯s not a bit of added surface language. It¡¯s refined and elegant. But we¡¯re not reimagining the past. It¡¯s not a retro look. We wanted to break the mold. It¡¯s provocative for Lincoln, and we believe it will change people¡¯s perceptions.¡±
That may be just as well, since the Lincoln design legacy is hardly untarnished. Like many American models, Lincoln¡¯s designs starting in the 1970s featured ever more bloated, kitschy elements, like white vinyl roofs, nonopening oval ¡°opera¡± windows, and fake spare tire covers, all heavily etched in chrome. The mid-¡¯70s Lincoln Versailles was little more than a tricked-out Ford Granada.
¡°Lincoln made amazing cars in the 1950s and early 1960s, and they absolutely lost their minds in the early 1970s,¡± Gadi Amit, president of New Deal Design in San Francisco, told me this week. Mr. Amit¡¯s firm has won over 70 design awards and specializes in technology, but he said he¡¯s a car buff and originally wanted to be a car designer. ¡°That was a national disaster, and it wasn¡¯t just Lincoln. Detroit is practically a ghost town, and a lot of the reason is a lot of really bad decisions about design management were made throughout the ¡¯70s, ¡¯80s and even into the ¡¯90s.¡±
With just 5.5 percent of the luxury car market and an aging customer base (average age: 65), Lincoln needs to attract buyers from other brands. While Mr. Wolff may have had a free hand, he was guided by copious amounts of consumer research. ¡°Cadillac and BMW have a very aggressive look that basically says, ¡®Get out of my way,¡¯?¡± Mr. Wolff said. ¡°We wanted to define our unique space in the luxury market.¡±
