PARIS 〞 Amid heated debates about ways to improve the management of Europe＊s fishing fleet and the ＊s Common Fisheries Policy, owners of fishing boats in northwest France have set up a new organization to help prevent overfishing and ensure themselves a sustainable livelihood.
The group, Les P那cheurs de Bretagne, or Breton Fishermen, formed in November by a merger of two existing groups, represents a third of the French fishing industry: 800 boats and 3,000 crew members, with an annual catch of 100,000 tons of fish 〞 mainly hake, pollack, monkfish and langoustine, or spiny lobsters 〞 worth ?283 million, or $374 million.
Despite decades of regulation, an ever-increasing appetite for fish and indiscriminate industrial-scale fishing techniques have brought many fish species to the brink of extinction. According to the environmental activist organization Greenpeace, 80 percent of fish stocks globally are overexploited or at the brink of being so.
The Breton organization, an umbrella group for the local Atlantic and Channel fishing fleets, collectively manages an important proportion of France＊s fishing quotas. Its members include single-boat captains and industrial flotillas like Scap那che, the largest French fishing fleet, which is owned by the supermarket chain Intermarch谷.
※When I first started fishing, 35 years ago, we overfished, did whatever we wanted,§ Patrice Donnart, the head of the organization, said in a phone interview this month from his home in Quimper, at the far western tip of Brittany. ※The regulation was nothing like today.§
※We felt the resources were simply endless,§ he added.
Now, Mr. Donnart said, ※I can see a new kind of professional conscience, a personal sense of responsibility, which is what we＊re pushing for. It＊s important to show the world we＊re not pirates.§
One of the key challenges facing the industry is to minimize the number of immature or unwanted fish that are netted along with the commercially valuable ones and usually go to waste or are turned into fish meal for farms.
To cut back on rejects, the Breton fisheries have developed several designs for nets and techniques for sorting at sea, working in tandem with scientists at the French Research Institute for Marine Exploitation, Ifremer.
One new trawl net design has a sorting grille at the bottom of the net that allows small fish to escape; another has a square mesh that catches langoustine but allows hake to get away.
According to Nolwenn Gace-Rimaud, P那cheurs de Bretagne project manager, the introduction of improved trawl nets by Brittany fishing fleets has spared the catch of 14 million unwanted hake annually and 70 million undersized langoustine. That earned the region＊s fisheries a champions award from the Seafood Choices Alliance, a private international group, at the International Boston Seafood show in 2008.
The organization has also taken on the coordination of measures to tackle the overfishing of specific species and fishing grounds 〞 for example, a two-month annual moratorium in February and March on -fishing in E.U. waters and a two-day-a-week ban on sardine fishing in the spawning season, from April to September.
A breach of the rules can result in confiscation of the catch, but that rarely happens, because peer pressure and collective surveillance act as strong deterrents, Ms. Gace-Rimaud said.
For the fishermen, respecting these limitations on their activity ※was a real sacrifice, at first,§ said Jacques Pichon, the organization＊s director. But the protection and rebuilding of fish stocks would be ※fruitful in the long run,§ he said. ※We are already seeing results.§
On the marketing front, P那cheurs de Bretagne is developing a sustainable fisheries labeling system. It is also active in the debate on changing the E.U. fisheries policy, where it argues for collectively managed quotas, opposing a proposal by the European Commission in July to introduce individual, purchasable, transferable fishing rights for boat owners, starting in 2014.
※Individual quotas are dangerous,§ said Isabelle Thomas, vice president of the Brittany Region Council responsible for marine affairs and coastal protection. ※They would make collective regulation impossible.§
The result, she said in a telephone interview, would be the sale of fishing rights at speculative prices, and a loss of jobs in the region.
A fundamental objective of the collective approach is to maintain a varied fishing fleet, resisting economic pressures for a smaller fleet of larger boats and industrial-scale catches, Ms. Thomas said. With industrial fishing, ※the resource is ruled by the market, disregarding the fishing industry＊s social responsibility,§ she said.
Still, P那cheurs de Bretagne, by virtue of the combined size of its membership, is itself a large commercial organization, noted Fran?ois Chartier, ocean campaigner for Greenpeace France. He urged it to give equal opportunity to the small boats ※to remain ethical.§
The small boats ※are more sustainable in the long run,§ he said, because they ※fish more selectively.§
