SAN FRANCISCO ¡ª is getting back on its game.
The first three months of the year might have been a challenge for Google from a public relations point of view, with politicians and state attorneys general, European regulators and ordinary users troubled by the search giant¡¯s new privacy policy. But its financial numbers were another matter, largely rebounding from a weak fourth quarter.
Along with , released after the markets closed on Thursday, Google . The split will create a new class of nonvoting shares and allow the company to reward its employees with stock without diluting existing shareholders. It is the first time Google, which went public in 2004, has split its shares.
The stock, which rose more than $15 during regular trading to $651, rose only slightly in after-hours trading.
Google¡¯s co-founder, , who took over as chief executive last April, said it was simply ¡°a very strong quarter.¡±
Net income rose 60 percent, to $2.89 billion, or $8.88 a share, compared with $1.8 billion, or $5.59 a share, in the same quarter a year earlier. The company said revenue rose 24 percent, to $10.65 billion. During a conference call with analysts, Google executives were peppered with several questions about the amount advertisers pay for clicks on Google ads, a metric called cost-per-click. It dropped 12 percent from the quarter a year ago and 6 percent from the fourth quarter. But the number of paid clicks was up 39 percent from the comparable quarter a year ago and up 7 percent from the fourth quarter of 2011.
Google earns nearly all its money from advertising. As computing shifts from desktops to mobile devices, there are concerns that this revenue stream will become less lucrative. Cost-per-click fell in the fourth quarter, too, worrying analysts that this was becoming a trend.
No worries, the executives said. The drops in cost-per-click ¡°don¡¯t reflect the fundamental health of our business,¡± said Patrick Pichette, the chief financial officer.
Colin Gillis, an analyst with BGC Partners, was not convinced. ¡°No matter what they say, advertisers are valuing Google¡¯s inventory less,¡± he said.
Google did not set a date for its new stock structure, which is technically a stock dividend. The new shares will trade alongside the current shares on the Nasdaq exchange, identical except for their lack of voting rights. While a purpose of the new shares will be to make acquisitions, Mr. Page said that did not mean any deals were being planned at this time.
None of the executives on the call directly addressed the concerns about privacy that generated so much attention over the last three months. The company has said it would construct a unified user profile as they watched YouTube, wrote e-mail and searched for diversion or information. Google called it ¡°a simpler, more intuitive Google experience.¡±
Some users called it invasive and complained noisily. An archrival, Microsoft, ran mocking ads. Politicians took notice. A former Google employee, James Whittaker, now working for Microsoft, wrote on a Microsoft blog that the company had lost its soul.
Senator Al Franken, the chairman of the Senate subcommittee on privacy, technology and the law, gave a speech to the American Bar Association¡¯s antitrust section that could not have thrilled company executives. Referring specifically to Google and Facebook, Mr. Franken wondered, ¡°Shouldn¡¯t we be concerned that, as these companies that trade in your personal information keep getting bigger and bigger, they become less and less accountable?¡±
Many people who follow the privacy issue closely said the reaction to Google¡¯s approach to data collection was overblown and misunderstood. But that was partly the company¡¯s fault. ¡°They can¡¯t go back and look at this and say, ¡®That was a great roll out.¡¯ It was a nightmare,¡± said Danny Sullivan, who writes the blog.
But Mr. Page seemed to reflect an awareness of that sentiment when he posted an open letter on the Google site that said, ¡°We have always wanted Google to be a company that is deserving of great love.¡±
To earn that love, at least from investors, Mr. Page will have to surmount several challenges in the next year. Foremost is doing a better job of anticipating privacy issues while improving the experience for advertisers.
Then there is Google¡¯s need to swallow its $12.5 billion acquisition of the handset maker Motorola Mobility. The deal was met with puzzlement from analysts, who said marrying a troubled phone manufacturer with a tech company that creates software used by many phone makers was fraught with problems.
Finally, an intangible: Google, almost from its birth in the dot-com bubble, defined cool. As Google enters middle age, it needs to show it can remain appealing as younger companies vie for the same engineering talent. (The new shares can be used to entice them.) Google drew favorable attention for its enhanced-reality glasses, still in the prototype stage. It needs to maintain the image of an energetic company.
Mr. Page seemed to acknowledge as much on Thursday. ¡°Google is a large company now,¡± he said. ¡°We will achieve more and do it faster if we approach life with the passion and the soul of a start-up.¡±
