HOUSTON ¡ª reported slightly higher fourth-quarter earnings on Tuesday as higher revenue for partly compensated for lower prices and soft refinery returns on chemicals and lubricants.
The world¡¯s largest publicly traded oil company reported net income of $9.4 billion for the quarter, up from $9.25 billion the year before. It posted revenue of $121.6 billion, up 16 percent.
The improved earnings reflected higher oil prices, which were above $100 a barrel for many benchmark crudes through the period because of continuing unrest in the Middle East and North Africa and strong demand from China and other developing countries. At the same time, natural gas prices continued to plummet in the United States because of a glut resulting from drilling in several shale fields around the country and sluggish demand.
Exxon Mobil became the largest gas producer in the United States when it bought XTO Energy for $25 billion in 2010, a deal that was questioned by many energy analysts as expensive.
But in a conference call, David S. Rosenthal, Exxon Mobil¡¯s vice president for investor relations, strongly defended the company¡¯s investment in natural gas and argued that over the long term it would be seen as wise.
¡°We remain bullish on the future of natural gas,¡± he said. ¡°We continue to be focused on the long term.¡± He said the merger with XTO was working out well, with improved productivity and efficiency driving down the costs of gas wells. That, he added, is ¡°paying off and that helps mitigate the lower prices. We are progressing well.¡±
He noted, however, that the company was shifting its rigs from drilling dry gas wells to gas wells rich with hydrocarbon liquids like ethane and butane used in many gasoline and petrochemical products. Analysts expect that the company¡¯s total production in 2012 will be 51 percent oil and 49 percent gas, with North American gas representing about 16 percent of the company¡¯s total gas production.
¡°Exxon Mobil results were in line with expectations,¡± said Fadel Gheit, a senior oil analyst at Oppenheimer & Company. ¡°But weak natural gas prices continue to depress the stock. Although I don¡¯t expect Exxon Mobil to shut in gas production, I am surprised they have not reduced discretionary gas drilling because of the low returns.¡±
Refining and marketing results were also somewhat disappointing, with earnings declining in the quarter to $425 million from $1.15 billion the year before. Total production of oil and gas for the quarter slipped, though it was slightly higher in all of 2011 over 2010. Exxon Mobil, like other large oil companies, is struggling to maintain production through acquisitions and exploration at a time when many of the wells in its inventory are aging and losing productivity.
Rex W. Tillerson, Exxon Mobil¡¯s chairman and chief executive, spoke positively of the quarter. ¡°Exxon Mobil recorded strong results while investing at record levels to develop new supplies of energy,¡± he said in a statement. ¡°Capital and exploration expenditures were a record $36.8 billion in 2011.¡±
Exxon Mobil shares, which remain close to their 52-week high, declined Tuesday by 2 percent to $83.74 a share.
On Tuesday, Valero Energy, a refinery giant, reported fourth-quarter net earnings of $45 million, well short of the $180 million profit for the same quarter last year, because of low gasoline and petrochemical margins.
Still, higher oil prices have helped some of the other major integrated oil companies report larger profits.
ConocoPhillips reported last week a 66 percent increase in earnings for the fourth quarter from the year before, attributed to high crude prices and asset sales. But its refining and marketing business reported a drop of nearly 3 percent. Chevron reported a 3.2 percent decline in fourth-quarter earnings, as poor refining results overwhelmed higher revenue from oil sales.
