HONG KONG ¡ª The operator of the Hong Kong stock exchange is looking for a bank loan to help finance an offer for the London Metal Exchange, in a sign that the exchange is aggressively pushing ahead with its bid.
According to a person with direct knowledge of the matter, the operator, Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing, or HKEx, is seeking to raise as much as $3 billion ¡ª its first-ever acquisition loan ¡ª to back its bid for the 135-year-old British commodities exchange.
Another person confirmed the loan discussions, but could not verify the amount. Both declined to be identified because the talks were not public.
HKEx declined to comment.
In addition to the Hong Kong exchange, the London exchange is considering three other potential buyers: , and . It has set a May 7 deadline for second-round bids.
Analysts and industry sources have valued London Metal Exchange at ?500 million to ?1.5 billion, or $800 million to $2.4 billion. A $3 billion acquisition financing package suggests the Hong Kong exchange¡¯s willingness to pay top dollar for control of the London exchange, the world¡¯s biggest market for industrial metals. The company could use leftover cash from the loan for other corporate purposes.
As in any auction, HKEx could decide not to proceed with a bid or a loan to back it.
The Hong Kong exchange is the world¡¯s biggest exchange by market capitalization. HKEx had cash and short-term investments of about 30.1 billion Hong Kong dollars, or $3.9 billion, as of the end of last year, according to Thomson Reuters data.
The exchange has limited ability to dip into cash reserves to pay for purchases, however, as it is required to maintain a capital buffer to cover the risks involved with running a clearinghouse.
HKEx sat on the sidelines when a wave of consolidation affected major financial markets more than a year ago.
At the time, HKEx focused on forming joint ventures and other nonequity alliances with the Chinese exchanges in Shanghai and Shenzhen.
Its place on the metal exchange auction¡¯s list and its loan pursuit show that this time, the HKEx is ready to pounce.
The exchange has made clear its ambition to jump into the commodities arena.
This year, the company set aside $258 million to expand into commodities and fixed income on its own. The push is led by its chief executive, Charles Li, and the head of market development, Romnesh Lamba, both former investment bankers.
