NICOSIA, Cyprus ¡ª Michalis Sarris is not the only European banker working seven days a week, trying to scrape together enough capital to satisfy regulators and keep his institution afloat. But he may be the only one with the financial fate of his nation potentially hanging in the balance.
Mr. Sarris, a 65-year-old onetime World Bank economist and former Cypriot finance minister, was drafted by bank regulators in January to take over as chairman of Cyprus¡¯s second-largest financial institution, Cyprus Popular Bank, formerly known as Marfin Popular Bank. It is now his job to find investors willing to help put ?1.8 billion, or $2.4 billion, in new money into the bank, which was devastated by its exposure to bad Greek debt.
Given the perilous state of the Cypriot economy, it is no easy assignment. And there is not much time left: Banks in Europe must demonstrate to the European Banking Authority by the end of June that they have enough capital to be viable.
Banks that cannot provide that evidence will face pressure to accept government bailouts or, in extreme cases, be shut down.
The failure of its biggest bank would have grave consequences for Cyprus, where the economy revolves around financial services ¡ª a result of the island¡¯s appeal as a low-tax gateway to the Middle East and Africa for companies from Russia and elsewhere in Europe.
But a collapse of Cyprus Popular would also be more bad news for the rest of the euro zone, just as a new fog of financial gloom seems to be descending on Europe. The shaky state of Cypriot banks and government finances threatens to add another name to the list of euro countries needing international bailouts.
¡°That is why it behooves us as Cypriots and Europeans not to let it happen,¡± Mr. Sarris said last week, shortly before flying to Moscow to meet with Russian bankers and wealthy individuals about investing in his bank.
All told, Cypriot banks have outstanding loans or other money at risk totaling ?152 billion, or eight times the size of the country¡¯s gross domestic product, according to the International Monetary Fund. It is the same kind of extreme vulnerability to financial shocks that devastated Ireland.
Greece, because of its proximity to Cyprus and a common language, had seemed a logical place for Cypriot banks to expand by extending loans to Greek businesses and consumers and loading up on Greek government debt.
Cyprus Popular amassed ?3.4 billion in Greek bonds, according to data from the European Banking Authority. Bank of Cyprus, the island¡¯s largest commercial bank, accumulated ?2.4 billion worth. In both cases, the banks¡¯ holdings of Greek bonds were larger than their holdings of all other government bonds combined.
The Greek debt crisis exposed the perils of that strategy. Cyprus Popular lost ?2.5 billion last year, while Bank of Cyprus lost ?1 billion.
Cyprus is in many ways unique in Europe. The Greek-speaking part of the island, a member of the euro currency union since 2008, has only about 790,000 people, about the same population as Columbus, Ohio. And as the easternmost outpost of the European Union, Cyprus is much closer to Beirut than Athens.
Cyprus is also the only E.U. member with a U.N. peacekeeping force, which has separated the larger Greek territory from the Turkish enclave since a war in 1974.
Nicosia, the dusty capital, remains a divided city, where Argentine peacekeepers guard barriers made of oil drums painted blue and white and topped with barbed wire. Tourists in Nicosia¡¯s old town can eat at the Berlin Wall Kebab Shop, abutting a crumbling stone section of the dividing line.
Cyprus was once known as the type of place where the Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic did his banking. But the central bank, which also regulates the financial sector, led a cleanup effort to meet standards that enabled Cyprus to join the European Union in 2004. Foreign diplomats say the island is now considered a legitimate banking hub.
