YANGON, Myanmar ¡ª One year into wide-ranging political reforms, this long-neglected city has some of the trappings of a boomtown.
Foreign businessmen in well-tailored suits are driven down potholed streets and past crumbling colonial buildings to meet potential partners, replacing adventure travelers in cargo pants and safari vests drawn by the city¡¯s backwardness.
Hotel owners, whose businesses suffered during years of military rule and economic mismanagement, are raising prices for what few rooms they have available. And property prices in some areas in and around the city, the country¡¯s economic capital, have tripled over the past year.
¡°Myanmar has a high growth potential and could become the next economic frontier in Asia,¡± said Meral Karasulu, an official at the International Monetary Fund in Washington who led a mission here in January.
Indeed, for foreign investors and investment banks that ignored the country during decades of military rule, Myanmar is virgin territory, an untapped market where only 4 percent of the population has cellphones and still fewer people have washing machines or air-conditioners, let alone cars.
But as the country opens up, many people who work in Myanmar, citizens and foreigners alike, say they are worried the country¡¯s underlying problems could stall or limit growth. The list of obstacles is daunting, including both longstanding troubles ¡ª the shortage of skilled labor, the absence of a solid legal system, deeply embedded corruption and dilapidated infrastructure ¡ª as well as new ones, including surprisingly high prices.
One of the most troubling concerns, businessmen say, is a lack of skilled workers.
Although the government of U Thein Sein, the president of Myanmar and the main driver of liberalization, has been in office only since March 2011, there are already severe shortages of some categories of workers.
¡°A lot of companies are asking for top managers in sales and marketing,¡± said U Ko Lin, the director of Career Development Consultancy, a leading recruitment and employment agency in Myanmar. ¡°I can¡¯t find them the right people. It¡¯s very hard.¡±
Last month, Mr. Ko Lin received a Japanese delegation scouting for business opportunities, and he was told that one of its members¡¯ main concerns was the local pool of labor. ¡°Everyone has the same conclusion: There¡¯s a lack of skills,¡± Mr. Ko Lin said. ¡°Because of the poor schools, you don¡¯t have quality people.¡±
Myanmar¡¯s education system was decimated during what the Asian Development Bank calls ¡°50 years of stagnation¡± under military rule. Universities, once centers of political dissent, were particularly hard hit and strapped for cash.
The South Korean manager of a shoe factory in Yangon said that trying to find even unskilled labor could be challenging. ¡°We have an extremely hard time finding employees,¡± said the manager, who had been advised by his company¡¯s lawyer not to give his name for fear of jeopardizing the company¡¯s operations in the country.
The manager, who has worked in Myanmar for three years, estimated that about half of his workers were functionally illiterate, much lower than he had anticipated.
Also a surprise, he said, was the contrast between workers in Myanmar and those his company employs in countries like Vietnam, China or Indonesia. Workers in Myanmar are gentle and friendly, he said, but ¡°not very motivated by money.¡±
During the years of military rule, there was an exodus of Burmese talent, primarily to Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and the gulf countries. The government has said it hopes to lure back Burmese who are living abroad. But for Burmese earning relatively good wages abroad, returning to Myanmar may be a question of price.
Mr. Ko Lin said that Burmese engineers working in Singapore in the or natural gas industries could sometimes demand salaries in Myanmar higher than what they were earning in Singapore.
The high wages that companies must pay in Myanmar to attract experienced workers undercuts some of the advantages typically associated with less developed countries.
