MINAS DE RIOTINTO, Spain ¡ª The Riotinto mine in the Andalusia region of southern Spain was once the world¡¯s largest copper producer, a British-owned operation that helped fuel the Industrial Revolution and gave its name to a mining giant that remains one of the world¡¯s biggest commodities producers.
Now, a new foreign investor is eager to reopen the long-idle mine to capitalize on soaring global copper prices. Proponents say the mine could help provide the sort of money and jobs Spain desperately needs right now, as the nation struggles with high unemployment and Europe worries it might be the next economy in need of a bailout.
But the Riotinto mine remains closed, tied up over regulatory delays, environmental concerns and a property dispute. No matter who is right, the stalled mining project illustrates the challenges Spain will face in digging itself out of a deep economic hole.
Rosa Caballero, the mayor of Minas de Riotinto, a town of 4,300 people, says the reopened mine could provide several hundred desperately needed jobs. She likens the impasse to ¡°a critically ill person who has been awaiting an implant from a donor and is then made to wait once a donor miraculously shows up.¡±
The mine, whose original British owners ceded to the Spanish during the dictatorship of Gen. Francisco Franco, has been closed since 2001 ¡ª when copper prices sank below $1,500 a ton.
But with copper prices now about $8,100 a ton, and because of rising demand from China and other emerging markets, another foreign company, Emed Mining, is looking to reopen the mine and return it to production next year.
Emed, whose stock is listed in London and Toronto, projects tens of millions of euros in new tax revenue a year to Spanish and regional governments, once production ramps up.
Spanish environmentalists, though, fear that the economic imperatives will trump safety concerns. They are demanding further testing of Riotinto¡¯s water reservoirs and other facilities that were abandoned more than a decade ago.
¡°We¡¯re very worried about whether some of the infrastructure could still withstand the company¡¯s production plans,¡± said Antonio Ramos, a representative of Ecologists in Action, an environmental group. ¡°If a reservoir wall was to break, it would cause a real tragedy.¡±
Many local residents seem more concerned about the prospect of jobs at a time when unemployment in the area around the mine has soared to 50 percent ¡ª more than double that of Spain as a whole and five times the European Union average. Residents have protested at the site, demanding that the government issue the permits necessary to let the mine reopen.
Emed completed financing for the $250 million project in February with the backing of investors that include a Chinese copper smelting company and Goldman Sachs. But besides a lack of permits from the regional government, the company has also been frustrated in its efforts to buy adjacent land that includes some of the water dams and most of the waste dumps that would be used by the mine. The owners have rejected Emed¡¯s bids as too low.
More than a century ago, when Riotinto¡¯s mining activity was at its peak, about 20,000 workers were employed there. The 19th-century British presence is still on display in the Bellavista neighborhood, where the mine¡¯s owners built homes and a clubhouse for managers and engineers, and introduced Spain to sports like tennis and golf.
Emed plans to start operations with 350 workers, raising that to 450 once its mine reaches full production capacity. Ms. Caballero estimated that the mining operation would create 1,200 jobs, including outside suppliers.
The company is also planning to reuse the copper-processing plant and much of the infrastructure that was left behind when the mine closed. That would save about $500 million required to start a mine from scratch, said William Enrico, Emed¡¯s managing director in Spain.
