FRANKFURT ¡ª Kuka, the largest European maker of industrial robots, is creating a regional hub in China to develop sales in a country where rising wages are lifting demand for automated factory gear.
Kuka, based in Germany, will increase its assembly capacity in China to 5,000 units this year, from fewer than 1,000 two years ago, said Till Reuter, the company¡¯s chief executive. China will become a center for procurement, production of components and assembly for the Asian region, while research, development and most production will remain in Germany, he said.
¡°China alone bought 15,000 robots last year, and we expect that number to rise to about 20,000 this year,¡± Mr. Reuter said. The company¡¯s target of an operating margin of 10 percent at the robot unit ¡°is within reach,¡± after having reached 9 percent in the fourth quarter, he said.
Rising wages, a push for quality and demands for faster production are prompting the Chinese manufacturing industry to buy more robots, helping European companies like Kuka and ABB turn lagging businesses into profit centers. Kuka¡¯s robots have become twice as profitable as the company¡¯s larger systems unit; ABB turned its robot unit around in 2010.
At Kuka, robotics revenue jumped 84 percent between 2009 and 2011, as customers like Volkswagen and Daimler bought equipment for new factories, and China became the world¡¯s largest auto market. Kuka had record orders, sales and operating profit last year.
While the demand from China so far has been driven by automobile production, Kuka is seeking more business with other industries. Manufacturers of semiconductors, electronic devices, food products and beverages are among the largest buyers of industrial robots, according data from the International Federation of Robotics, an industry group based in Frankfurt.
While China does not publish broad data on wages, the government sets goals for increases in the minimum wage, seeking an annual increase of 13 percent for the five-year period through 2015. Between 2000 and 2007, the measure almost doubled, according to the International Labor Office, a U.N. agency.
The minimum wage was raised in 13 Chinese provinces in the first quarter of 2011 by an average of 21 percent, the I.L.O. said in its Global Employment Trends 2012 report published in January. Wages are expected to rise further over the medium term as the growth of the labor force starts to slow for demographic reasons.
¡°Salary inflation is the driving force behind robot demand in China,¡± Michel Demare, the ABB chief financial officer, said in February.
ABB is the second-largest European industrial robot maker after Kuka, and one out of three robots it sells goes to customers in Asia. The business had record deliveries in 2011, said Per-Vegard Nerseth, who heads the ABB robotics unit in China. He said he expected unit sales to rise further this year.
The value of the global industrial robot-system market is expected to double to $41 billion by 2020, according to Christine Wang, an analyst at Daiwa Capital Markets in Hong Kong. Global unit sales last year jumped about 30 percent to a record 150,000 units, the International Federation of Robotics said. Kuka forecasts that growth at its robotics unit this year will outpace the industry, which it expects to expand by about 2 percent.
Japanese rivals are also preparing for the boom. Fanuc, which sold about 18,000 units in 2010, increased production capacity last year to 60,000. Yaskawa Electric said it was building plants in Japan and China to meet rising demand.
China is expected to pass South Korea and Japan to become the largest robot market next year, according to a forecast from the robotics federation. Units in operation worldwide are expected to top 1.3 million by 2014, the group said.
Ms. Wang of Daiwa said Kuka held the No. 4 position in China by market share in 2010, behind Yaskawa, ABB, and Fanuc.
Mr. Reuter, the Kuka chief, said higher wages in China made investing in robots a simple trade-off. ¡°It comes down to the question: At what cost can a robot do the job more efficiently?¡±
