NEW DELHI ¡ª As evening falls in Chuddani, a village of about 500 homes, people arrive by bicycle, motorbike, tractor and on foot with jugs that they fill with water from faucets outside a neat blue shed. Inside the building is a filtration plant that cleans the local groundwater of chemicals, toxins and bacteria. Above the faucets, a sign hand-written in Hindi says: ¡°Water is life.¡±
Anand Sehwag, 27, a brick seller, lives in Chuddani, 45 kilometers, or 28 miles, from Delhi, with his family of seven. Before the clean-water plant was built, in 2009, Mr. Sehwag and his relatives drank water from village hand pumps. They knew it was dirty, but they drank it anyway. They often suffered stomach pains, coughs and aches, he said.
Groundwater in Chuddani is full of impurities: its total dissolved solids content of 1,850 milligrams per liter is far above the World Health Organization¡¯s acceptable level of 500. The filtered water from the clean water plant has a level of 65.
In the developing world, providing safe drinking water remains a major infrastructure and public health challenge.
In 1990 about 34 percent of Indians lacked safe drinking water; by 2008 that figure had fallen to 17 percent, according to a 2011 from the Indian statistics ministry. Yet tens of millions of people, out of India¡¯s population of 1.2 billion, still lack access to clean water.
According to the same report, 76 percent of India¡¯s population had no access to hygienic toilets in 1990. By 2008, the figure had fallen, but was still 58 percent: and because sewage and waste disposal systems are often crude or non-existent in India, water, whether from wells or surface sources, is easily contaminated with toxins, including arsenic.
Access to clean water is an urgent global health issue. Dirty water can cause typhoid, hepatitis and cholera, in addition to diarrhea, which kills about 1.5 million children worldwide each year ¡ª more than AIDS, measles and malaria combined ¡ª according to Unicef.
Community water plants like the one in Chuddani, built and run with the help of the Naandi Foundation, are one way to put a dent in the enormous problem. Since 2005, Naandi, based in the southern city of Hyderabad, has opened 428 similar plants in five states: Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Karnataka and Haryana. Naandi water plants serve about 1.5 million people across India.
Each filtration center costs one million rupees, or about $20,000, to build, said Gayitri Handanahal, a national supervisor for Naandi who is based in Bangalore. State governments and corporate donors finance the equipment and construction.
Naandi works on water projects with Danone Communities, a unit of the French dairy company Danone that has provided investment and expertise. Another partner is Tata Projects, which supplies reverse-osmosis and ultraviolet water filtration equipment ¡ª giant tubes fitted with filters to trap tiny particles and UV light to kill bacteria.
The filtration systems are similar to ones fitted in many middle-class Indian homes but larger, able to clean as much as 2,000 liters, or 525 gallons, of water an hour.
Panchayats, or village governments, provide land for the water center, as well as electricity and access to water supplies, like wells. The states and donors pay for the filter technology, construction of the shed and equipment like water pumps and 5,000-liter storage tanks.
Villagers are expected to do their part, too. Naandi relies on local residents ¡ª who might earn just a few dollars a day ¡ª to pay 60 to 150 rupees, or $1.20 to $3, a month, depending in part on their income, for 20 liters of clean water every day.
The fee pays for Naandi¡¯s regular maintenance of the plant and the salary of a full-time operator from the village.
Mobilizing government agencies and corporate sponsors is feasible, Ms. Handanahal said during an interview in New Delhi last month. The bigger challenge is changing behavior ¡ª persuading the villagers to drink, and pay for, clean water. Some are reluctant to pay when they can drink free from hand pumps, wells or taps.
