SEATTLE
ON the second floor of one of the oldest Sears stores in the country, ¡°Ellen¡± is blaring from one of the newest arrivals in the electronics section, a 60-inch LCD flat-screen television with LED backlighting and built-in Wi-Fi.
If you stare longingly at the set, a sales associate may begin quizzing you about your brand preference, price point and the size of your TV room.
Is energy efficiency important to you? That kind of question might be more standard for potential buyers of the store¡¯s front-load washers and kitchen appliances. Even so, roughly a third of the television models on display bear a small orange label with a fast-forward button on it and a message that says, ¡°Most efficient. Engineered to be the best of Energy Star.¡±
The label provides a good ¡°visual cue¡± for broaching the subject of energy efficiency, said the store manager, Gary Lorentson, and can help tip the balance toward a greener selection.
What the label doesn¡¯t say is that it was intended largely to bypass an appeal to do-gooderism in favor of winning over your more predictable inner tech fan. And if you go home with a 60-inch television boasting killer picture quality, you may get extra satisfaction knowing that your engineering marvel consumes only as much energy as a 75-watt light bulb.
A convergence of clever advertising and engineering advances in televisions, appliances and housing components is allowing green marketers to recast high-efficiency options as practical problem-solvers for the home rather than as saviors of the planet. Newly honed pitches steeped in consumer psychology are linking up the traits people crave ¡ª cutting-edge quality, say, or convenience ¡ª with the energy savings and reduced emissions championed by environmentalists.
The trick is to avoid evoking past stereotypes of green products with references to ¡°the planets, the babies and the daisies,¡± said Jacquelyn A. Ottman, a New York-based advertising consultant and the author of the 2011 book ¡°The New Rules of Green Marketing¡± (Berrett-Koehler).
Many such products, she said, carry perceptions that they are more expensive or don¡¯t perform as well and may not even be that green. Ms. Ottman therefore cautions against pigeonholing consumer goods as merely virtuous. ¡°Green is the icing on the cake,¡± she says. ¡°It¡¯s a source of added value, but it can¡¯t replace the benefits that consumers expect from the products that they buy.¡±
She recalled how an early efficiency pioneer, Whirlpool¡¯s Energy Wise refrigerator, ¡°died on the vine¡± in 1994 after consumers balked at the higher price and a lack of choice in features and styles, which created the impression that buying one entailed a sacrifice.
By contrast, the company¡¯s sharply styled and highly efficient Duet front-load washer, introduced in 2001, won far broader acceptance after reviews flowed in that the machine allowed a large capacity, washed more thoroughly than a top-loader and was gentler on clothes.
Because it may take a while for upfront costs of a green appliance to be recouped through increased energy efficiency, many consumers are unwilling to pay a ¡°green premium.¡± In the aggregate, though, the energy savings for the community and the nation can add up quickly, creating a strong incentive for local governments, utilities and environmental organizations to promote their use.
Among the latter is the nonprofit Northwest Energy Efficiency Alliance, supported by utilities serving about 12 million consumers in Washington, Oregon, Idaho and Montana. It says that a regionwide shift to high-efficiency televisions could yield enough energy savings to power more than 290,000 homes each year.
With that in mind, the alliance started its Energy Forward initiative, the source of the little orange label, in late 2008. One strategy involved approaching Sears, Costco, Best Buy and other retailers that collectively sell 80 percent of the region¡¯s televisions and offering them a financial incentive of $5 to $15 per set to stock more efficient models.
