LONDON ¡ª The oil market has broken a two-year cycle of tightening supply conditions, the International Energy Agency said Thursday, as demand softens and increases output in response to tensions with .
The agency said in its monthly report that there had potentially been a rise in global oil stocks of 1 million barrels per day over the last quarter, and the impact on prices had not yet been fully realized.
¡°The cycle of repeatedly tightening fundamentals since 2009 has been broken for now,¡± it said.
The Paris-based organization, which advises 28 industrialized nations on energy policy, said the possibility that countries, led by the United States, could release stocks from strategic reserves, together with a pledge from Saudi Arabia to supply clients ahead of this week¡¯s negotiations with Iran over its disputed , had tempered recent price gains.
¡°Easing first quarter 2012 fundamentals have seen prices recently lose most of the $5 per barrel they gained in March. The muted impact so far is partly because much of this extra supply has been stockpiled on land or at sea,¡± the I.E.A. said.
Brent crude futures rose to highs not seen since 2008 of $128.40 a barrel in early March, but have since given up those gains to trade at around $120.10 on Thursday.
The I.E.A. said it was not surprising that extra barrels were being sent into storage in March and April, when demand is typically slacker.
Analysts said that while the report initially suggests a well-supplied market, there remain concerns about replacing Iranian crude.
¡°At an initial level report appears to present a market that is well supplied ... but if you look closely, concerns around Iran and fact that stocks are still low remain key issues,¡± said Gareth Lewis-Davies, energy commodity strategist at BNP Paribas.
¡°If you have to replace Iranian oil, we can do that but at the cost of spare capacity. And then, given O.E.C.D. stocks are low by historical standards, there is less slack in the system.¡±
Output from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries was near a three-and-a-half year high of 31.43 million barrels per day in March, up 135,000 barrels from the previous month.
¡°I think again the I.E.A. report illustrates that there is plenty of oil in the market at the moment,¡± said Carsten Fritsch, a Commerzbank oil analyst. ¡°There is too much ¡ª a physical oversupply.¡±
Iraq, Libya and the United Arab Emirates increased output in the quarter, while Saudi Arabia, the top exporter, raised output to around 10 million barrels per day in April, an increase of 100,000 barrels, offsetting losses from Iran and Angola.
The Saudi Arabian oil minister said Thursday that the kingdom would pump more if needed.
According to the I.E.A., Iranian production in March fell by a further 50,000 barrels per day, to 3.3 million barrels. That was about 250,000 barrels below levels seen at the end of 2011, before Western governments imposed sanctions.
