The Polish authorities say they are open to an inflow of Russian capital, even if they are doing what they can to bolster Polish banks against Russian takeovers.
In a move aimed at strengthening the domestic banking sector, Bank Zachodni WBK announced in February that it would merge with the much smaller Kredyt Bank, a subsidiary of KBC Group of Belgium, to create one of the largest banks in Poland. The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development will support the deal by purchasing a stake in the new entity for 332 million zlotys, or $104 million.
Bank Zachodni is almost wholly owned by Banco Santander, the Spanish banking giant, but its shares are traded on the Warsaw Stock Exchange and it is considered a standalone business.
¡°We are very supportive of local markets,¡± said Lucyna Stanczak, director of Poland for the European reconstruction bank. The merger needs the approval of the Polish Financial Supervision Authority.
The Polish authorities are also exploring ways to tap capital from sources like government pension funds to capitalize domestic banks.
West European banks have been attracted by the strength of the Polish economy. While many other European Union economies are teetering in or near recession, the Polish economy is expected to grow 3 percent this year, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Gunter Deuber, an economist at Raiffeisen Research in Vienna, said the Poles could try to throw up regulatory barriers against Russian banks trying to enter the market. No matter how useful direct foreign investment might be to the Polish economy, from whatever source, many Poles still harbor deep resentment toward Russia from the Soviet era, he said.
Poland depends heavily on Russian natural gas and crude . Nevertheless, since joining the European Union, Poland has directly challenged Russian interests in former Soviet states, including the Baltic countries, Belarus and Ukraine, by supporting pro-Western positions in those countries.
Ties between Warsaw and Moscow were further strained in 2010 when a plane crashed en route to Russia, killing President Lech Kaczynski and the nearly 100 other members of Poland¡¯s political, military and religious elite on board.
¡°I would assume that the Polish regulator will be looking at them, or should be looking at them, as any other foreign investor entering the Polish market,¡± Ms. Stanczak said of Russian bankers. The Russians, she said, will undoubtedly face ¡°some political debate or discussion.¡±
