For decades, fans have been able to buy merchandise inspired by their favorite television shows, like posters, T-shirts, records, books, jigsaw puzzles and dolls. But now a TV series has generated products that are meant to be practical rather than trinkets and knickknacks.
The ¡°Dirty Jobs¡± show on the Discovery Channel cable network is the inspiration for a line of cleaning products also named Dirty Jobs. The products, all labeled ¡°heavy duty,¡± include a stain remover, carpet cleaners, a spot and stain remover, a degreaser and hand sanitizers.
¡°Get tough on your dirtiest jobs,¡± the package labels urge. (Fortunately for Dirty Jobs, Procter & Gamble long ago stopped selling its Top Job) The Dirty Jobs products are being marketed by a new company, called My Dirty Jobs, that is licensing the ¡°Dirty Jobs¡± name from the Discovery Channel parent, Discovery Communications.
Mike Rowe, the host of ¡°Dirty Jobs,¡± is involved, too, taking part in the effort through his company, MRW Holdings. Mr. Rowe¡¯s initiative to help support the skilled trades, , and his mikeroweWorks Foundation are mentioned on the products¡¯ packages and the My Dirty Jobs Web site, at .
The Dirty Jobs cleaning products are being promoted through a campaign with a budget estimated at $20 million to $25 million. The campaign includes, in addition to , direct response television commercials on cable networks like A&E, Discovery Channel, Hallmark Channel and Travel Channel; video clips in Walmart stores, the My Dirty Jobs retail partner; online ads; a presence in social ; and public relations.
Mr. Rowe is featured in the campaign, along with Niecy Nash, the star of cable series like ¡°Clean House¡± on Style Network and ¡°Leave It to Niecy¡± on TLC. Mr. Rowe adds Dirty Jobs to a list of brands he pitches that also includes Caterpillar, Ford, Lee jeans and .
The commercials for the Dirty Jobs line are being created internally at My Dirty Jobs, which has a corporate office in Los Angeles, a sales office in Phoenix and a marketing office in Las Vegas. The Web ads are being handled by Ignite Media Solutions and the public relations duties are being handled by Trent & Company.
The co-founders of My Dirty Jobs ¡ª Adam Lerner, president, and Christian Darby, executive vice president for product marketing ¡ª have extensive experience in the realm of direct response sales for companies like Ronco.
¡°Direct response is about advertising the brand and building awareness,¡± Mr. Lerner says, ¡°and there¡¯s the benefit of selling some product directly to consumers.¡±
¡°We plan to touch the customer in every way the customer can be reached,¡± he adds, citing examples like Facebook, where Walmart has almost 14.4 million likes and ¡°Dirty Jobs¡± with Mr. Rowe has more than 2.1 million likes.
Mr. Rowe says endorsing a line of cleaning products named after his series ¡°wasn¡¯t something I was affirmatively considering¡± before he was approached by the executives behind My Dirty Jobs. But he recalls an appearance in 2006, at the annual conference of the Association of National Advertisers, with an actor dressed as Mr. Clean.
¡°There was the most recognizable guy in the cleaning category standing next to the dirtiest guy in TV,¡± Mr. Rowe says.
Mr. Rowe says he became open to the idea of doing something in the category that was ¡°authentic to me.¡±
¡°My honest feeling is that I don¡¯t know how much permission I have to do this¡± from consumers, Mr. Rowe says.
But ¡°somewhere in this weird nexus of social media, brand ubiquity and five minutes of fame, people are still looking for something that feels authentic,¡± he adds.
From that came a concept for the Dirty Jobs products that ¡°dirt is not the enemy,¡± Mr. Rowe says. Rather, he adds, ¡°Dirt is good.¡±
That sentiment is expressed in the videos that play at the checkouts in Walmart stores, in which Mr. Rowe jokes about how ¡°I can finally say I¡¯ve gotten filthy in all 50 states.¡±
Mr. Rowe extols the Dirty Jobs products in the videos as ¡°not just for people who get dirty, but for people who have to clean up after the people who get dirty.¡±
In a commercial with Ms. Nash, she gives a shout-out to ¡°Mr. ¡®Dirty Jobs¡¯ himself, Mike Rowe¡± in praising the Dirty Jobs stain remover. And in the videos for the Walmart stores, she declares: ¡°Hey, Walmart shoppers, I¡¯m a Walmart girl just like you. Ooh!¡±
Dirty Jobs represents the first product endorsement for Ms. Nash, she says, prompted in part by how much of a fan she is of Mr. Rowe.
Before agreeing to pitch Dirty Jobs, ¡°I had to really give it the smell test¡± she adds, laughing, ¡°and use it, and by that I mean force my children.¡±
Ms. Nash calls herself ¡°a good fit¡± for endorsing the line because ¡°I am a mom, I am hands-on.¡±
She says she enjoyed working with Mr. Rowe on the campaign and told him, ¡°Baby, we are a TV series waiting to happen.¡±
¡°His improv is impeccable,¡± Ms. Nash says. ¡°It was so much fun, it didn¡¯t feel like working.¡±
As for whether she is interested in additional endorsements, Ms. Nash says, ¡°it would depend on what the product is.¡±
When a reporter lists the other brands endorsed by Mr. Rowe like Ford, Lee and Caterpillar, she says: ¡°I can drive. I can wear jeans. You lost me at the tractor.¡±
The decision by Discovery Communications to license the ¡°Dirty Jobs¡± name for the cleaning products is not the first time the show¡¯s title has been licensed.
