THE world¡¯s largest energy companies have big plans for Mozambique.
Until recently, the East African country was better known for its long civil war, and had few energy resources compared with regional heavy-hitters like Nigeria and Angola.
But in the last 10 years, companies like Exxon Mobil, the BG Group of Britain and Eni of Italy have used the latest technologies, including advances in deep-sea drilling, to find new resources that are turning Mozambique into the center of an energy boom.
Up and down the country¡¯s shoreline, Western energy companies, as well as a number of Asian competitors, are drilling wells thousands of feet below the Indian Ocean in hopes of striking it rich. The rewards could be huge. Mozambique may have more deposits of natural gas ¡ª used in everything from manufacturing to electricity generation ¡ª than the European energy giant Norway.
The East African country is not alone in its newfound energy wealth. Countries like Tanzania and Kenya also are attracting billions of dollars in investment from the world¡¯s largest energy companies as they search for new and gas reserves.
¡°Africa will be the backbone of our production and growth in the next 10 years,¡± Paolo Scaroni, chief executive of Italian energy giant Eni, told investors last month in London.
In total, the Italian company expects to spend $50 billion to develop natural gas projects off the coast of Mozambique. While production may not start until the end of the decade, the energy firm has designated the new reserves for customers in fast-growing Asian markets like India and China.
Other companies, including of Texas, also have multibillion-dollar plans for such new African oil and gas finds. Most, too, expect to sell the energy to emerging economies hungry to drive domestic growth.
The quickening pace of exploration in East Africa is part of a wider shake-up in the global energy industry as it scrambles to adapt to a series of major changes. Those range from the nuclear disaster in Japan last year, to slashed subsidies for alternative energy amid Europe¡¯s economic crisis, to a boom in unconventional fossil fuels like shale gas that has spread across continents.
The changes have been particularly drastic in fast-growing China, now the world¡¯s largest energy user and emitter of carbon dioxide. Since opening its economy over three decades ago, the Asian giant has become an insatiable consumer of natural resources. The country still relies predominantly on dirty for its electricity, but has fast-tracked oil production, as well as newer technologies like shale gas, and and wind power, to maintain its high levels of domestic growth.
With demand from emerging economies continuing apace, the quest for new fossil fuels is opening up unexplored territories for production. That may help to offset the effect of rising oil prices, which have reached almost record highs.
¡°The demand from billions of people worldwide to consume energy isn¡¯t slowing down,¡± said Adi Karev, the global head of the oil and gas practice at the consultancy Deloitte in Hong Kong. ¡°Companies¡¯ ability to find new energy reserves, especially in remote locations, is altering the global market.¡±
The opportunities are welcome in more ways than one. The new discoveries, including the so-called tar sands of Canada, are allowing Western companies like Royal Dutch Shell and BP to diversify and safeguard future production. State-owned firms like Sinopec of China and Gazprom of Russia have slowly taken over production of their domestic reserves, leaving them in control of roughly 85 percent of the world¡¯s oil resources, according to the Energy Information Administration.
The discoveries also are helping countries from the United States to Romania to decrease their dependence on foreign energy imports as well as generate tax revenue and employment.
Poland presents a case in point. Since 2009, , using many of the techniques pioneered in the United States. The new energy resources could have a major effect on Poland, which currently imports more than 80 percent of its natural gas from Russia, its once dominant neighbor. The potential reserves may provide Poland with enough gas for more than 50 years, according to the country¡¯s national geological institute.
¡°There¡¯s a real desire in Poland to build their own natural gas supplies,¡± said Ian MacDonald, Chevron¡¯s general manager for business development and transportation. ¡°They recognize that there¡¯s a national interest.¡±
So far, the American energy company has been drilling test wells to figure out how much shale gas can be extracted. Chevron has permits to explore more than one million acres in the southeast of Poland. It expects to have a clear picture of the potential size of the region¡¯s energy reserves by the end of next year.
