MOSCOW ¡ª The motto of the Russian state-owned bank Sberbank is ¡°always nearby.¡± Its branches, adorned with a cheery green-and-white logo, are truly ubiquitous in its home market.
But Sberbank, wanting that motto to apply well beyond Russian borders, is on an acquisition campaign that might seem a banker¡¯s version of rebuilding the old Soviet bloc.
Aiding Sberbank¡¯s effort is a pullback from Eastern Europe by some of the large Western European banks that flocked to the region after the Communist breakup two decades ago. The Western banks, responding to and the need to bolster their capital reserves, have been calling in loans and contemplating the sale of branches in Eastern Europe.
That is how Sberbank, for example, was able to strike a deal to buy Volksbank of Austria¡¯s operations in eight Eastern European countries ¡ª Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovenia, Croatia, Ukraine, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina ¡ª for about $800 million at current exchange rates. The deal, announced last fall, helped clinch Sberbank¡¯s status as the largest bank operating in Eastern Europe, as measured by its total assets of $368 billion at the end of 2011.
Although analysts and Sberbank¡¯s nongovernment shareholders are not necessarily applauding its efforts, the bank is now looking for other takeover targets left vulnerable by departing or weakened Western institutions. The Western banks curtailing their Eastern Europe exposure include BCP of Portugal, which has put its Polish subsidiary Millennium Bank up for sale.
¡°An opportunity is presenting itself,¡± Sergei Guriev, a member of the Sberbank board, said in a telephone interview. Sberbank, he said, had planned to expand even before the escalated, he said.
Now, the pressure on Western banks to retrench to maintain their capital requirements, he said, is making it a buyer¡¯s market in Eastern Europe for Sberbank. ¡°It¡¯s not often banking assets are up for sale,¡± he said. ¡°Now banks interested in buying have a choice.¡±
Meanwhile, as businesses in the region seek loans, more companies are having to look beyond Western-linked banks to lenders like Sberbank, which is feeling flush. It had 2011 profits of $10.7 billion, and its stock-market value of about $70 billion is second only to HSBC among European banks.
Through Volksbank, Sberbank says it now manages $6.9 billion in loans to corporate and individual customers in Eastern Europe.
¡°One of the costs to the West of the crisis will be the loss of the soft power influence of finance,¡± said Roland Nash, a senior partner in Verno Capital, a -focused hedge fund that invests in Sberbank. ¡°Companies that were able to look to the West now turn to Moscow.¡±
Whether Western businesses and financiers would agree is debatable. But it is an image that Russia is eager to project ¡ª part of what Prime Minister Dmitri A. Medvedev has referred to as turning Moscow into an international financial center. Another symbol of that is the construction of Federation Tower East, a 93-story skyscraper in Moscow¡¯s financial district that will be Europe¡¯s tallest building when completed next year.
Sberbank, which traces its origins to a 19th-century trust that was founded by the czars and survived the Soviet period to emerge as Russia¡¯s largest banking company, is still mostly unknown in the West.
But in many ways, the Russian bank¡¯s Eastern Europe push is continuing an expansion into former Soviet-influenced territory that began during the 2008 financial crisis. Benefiting from distracted or wounded Wall Street players that had become leery of risky lending in former Soviet countries, Sberbank began acquiring local banks to quickly become the biggest foreign bank in Kazakhstan and one of the largest in Ukraine.
Now, the prospect of a bank controlled by the Russian government amassing power in the former Soviet bloc region is, understandably, making regulators nervous in Poland and elsewhere in central and Eastern Europe. In 2008, Mr. Medvedev, who was then the nation¡¯s president, claimed for Russia an undefined ¡°sphere of privileged interests¡± that could include Eastern European nations.
In response to Russia¡¯s interest, Polish authorities are now seeking to strengthen their banking sector by encouraging the merger of local banks into larger, more solvent entities, and urging Polish companies to explore the home market for sources of capital.
¡°For the Russians, entering Poland could be challenging,¡± said Gunter Deuber, an economist at Raiffeisen Research in Vienna.
