WASHINGTON ¡ª A decade after the dot-com bubble popped and Enron became synonymous with spectacular fraud, Congress is on the verge of scrapping numerous safeguards against investment fraud and allowing some small companies to sell stock to the public with minimal disclosure or oversight.
The bill, which intends to make it easier for emerging companies to raise money and court investors, is scheduled for several procedural votes in the Senate on Tuesday and could come to a final vote as early as this week. A Senate amendment that differs substantially from a bipartisan by the House two weeks ago, faces a difficult hurdle.
The amendment must get 60 votes on Tuesday to revise the House bill, and it is unclear that Democrats will be able to attract enough Republican votes.
The JOBS Act, whose acronym stands for Jump-start Our Business Start-ups, has attracted widespread support on Capitol Hill and from the White House for its promise of attracting small-business investment and allowing businesses to hire workers. That it would give legislators something positive to take home to constituents during election season is a bonus.
But the bill faces stiff opposition from, among others, the chairwoman of the , pension funds and lobbying groups like the American Association of Retired Persons, which fear that the bill will revive some of the worst practices of the dot-com era.
¡°Too often, investors are the target of fraudulent schemes disguised as investment opportunities,¡± Mary L. Schapiro, the S.E.C. chairwoman, wrote in a March 13 letter to the Senate banking committee. ¡°As you know, if the balance is tipped to the point where investors are not confident that there are appropriate protections, investors will lose confidence in our markets, and capital formation will ultimately be made more difficult and expensive.¡±
House Republicans say that their bill offers plenty of protection. The House Financial Services Committee, which advanced the bill, on Monday noting that a witness chosen by Democrats ¡°said the bill would increase investor protections and access to information.¡±
A move in the Senate to amend substantial portions of a bill that evolved over several months in the House are little more than an attempt to kill the bill, said Representative Spencer Bachus, the Alabama Republican who is chairman of the House committee. He added that the Senate was ¡°acting like Lucy snatching the football away at the last possible moment, and it is the entrepreneurs and job-creators who are made to play Charlie Brown.¡±
The bill does include some curious elements, beginning with its definition of an ¡°emerging business¡± as one with annual revenue of up to $1 billion or has no more than $700 million in publicly held stock. At an S.E.C. forum in 2010 formation, one of the top recommendations from small-business experts was to set a limit of $250 million in public stock for companies to qualify for small-business exemptions from many securities regulations. A Senate amendment sponsored by Jack Reed, Democrat of Rhode Island, would at $350 million of annual revenue.
The House bill would also require an emerging growth company to file no more than two years of financial statements before it sold shares to the public and would exempt those companies from hiring an independent auditor to assess its internal controls.
The measure also would throw out restrictions on financial analysts taking part in a Wall Street firm¡¯s attempt to win the business of underwriting a company¡¯s stock offering. Those rules grew out of the dot-com bubble, when analysts publicly promoted the stocks of a firm¡¯s investment banking clients, sometimes even while disparaging the stocks privately.
Even the United States Chamber of Commerce, which has strongly supported the House bill, said in a letter to the House Financial Services Committee last month that ¡°there may be a blurring of boundaries that could create potential conflicts of interests between the research and investment components of broker-dealers.¡±
The White House, with its own needs to chalk up job-growth programs before the election, issued a ¡°statement of administration policy¡± this month supporting the House bill and noting that President Obama ¡°called for cutting the red tape that prevents many rapidly growing start-up companies from raising needed capital,¡± while also providing for ¡°appropriate investor protections.¡±
Subsequently, the White House issued another statement saying it supported Senate amendments to the House bill on investor protection. ¡°The president strongly supports the efforts of Senate Democrats to find common ground by supporting the most effective aspects of the House bill to increase capital formation for growing businesses while also improving the House bill to ensure there are sufficient safeguards to prevent abuse and protect investors,¡± it said.
The Senate this week plans to consider another amendment to the House JOBS bill that would finance the Export-Import Bank through 2015 and increase its loan limit to $140 billion from $100 billion currently, an amount that the bank estimates it will reach in a few months. The House bill did not include any such measure, and House Republicans have said they oppose tacking the Export-Import amendment onto their work.
