HONG KONG ¡ª The outlook for the Chinese economy may finally be looking a little less worrisome.
Data released by the authorities in Beijing on Friday painted a picture of an economy that has lost much of the breakneck speed of previous years and that still relies on government-directed stimulus, but that started to regain some momentum last month.
¡°The economy is not zooming off to the moon, but it is taking off again,¡± said David Carbon, economist at DBS Bank in Singapore. ¡°It is not an issue of whether China will have a hard or soft landing anymore ¡ª China began to take off again three or four months ago.¡±
Nervousness about the state of the Chinese economy ¡ª a main engine of global growth and an important market for companies like General Electric, Volkswagen and Louis Vuitton ¡ª has weighed heavily on markets worldwide for much of the past year, as it became clear that the pace of growth was slowing considerably.
Economic growth data for the first three months of 2012 underlined the severity of the slowdown. The economy expanded 8.1 percent from the quarter a year earlier. That figure, though impressive in comparison with the anemic growth of the United States, Europe and Japan, was a sharp slowdown from previous quarters and came against analysts¡¯ expectations of an increase of 8.4 percent.
China faces pressure on two fronts. Domestically, demand has weakened and the important construction and real estate sectors have slowed, in large part because of government efforts last year to curtail rapid expansion. At the same time, overseas demand for Chinese-made goods has faltered as consumers in the United States and Europe remain worried about their job prospects.
In that context, the growth data released Friday also helped cement expectations that Beijing would continue to push the economic accelerator by allowing more bank lending, freeing up spending on infrastructure and public housing projects and easing taxes selectively.
And although only a few economists now expect the central bank to deploy the sweeping tool of cutting lending rates, most say that borrowing costs will remain low for some time.
¡°If you talk to businesses in China, whether large or small, you hear many complaining that the situation is very difficult,¡± said Yao Wei, an economist at Soci¨¦t¨¦ G¨¦n¨¦rale in Hong Kong. Moreover, the construction sector will probably continue to languish for several months before investment picks up again.
As a result, Ms. Yao said, the Chinese economy still faces a tough second quarter before an acceleration materializes later in the year, and the government will be careful to keep injecting fuel, if needed, into the economy.
Indeed, a string of such economy-supporting steps taken since late last year appear to have borne fruit ¡ª so much so that some analysts sa the turnaround that Ms. Yao projects for the third quarter may, in fact, already have happened.
¡°Green shoots have sprung up in many sectors, convincing us that the current slowdown looks more and more like a slow consolidation, rather than a precipitous downturn like we saw in 2008-9,¡± Xianfang Ren, a China analyst at IHS Global Insight in Beijing, wrote in a research note.
Zhiwei Zhang, a China economist at Nomura, and Brian Jackson, a strategist at the Royal Bank of Canada in Hong Kong, echoed this view: Both said Friday that they believed the economy had already hit a trough in the first quarter of 2012.
This view was given further support Friday by some of the other data released by the National Bureau of Statistics.
While the year-on-year expansion was poor, for example, the rate of expansion from the fourth quarter of last year was healthier than expected.
Quarter-on-quarter growth ¡ª which many analysts focus on because it gives a clearer sense of the economy¡¯s recent performance than the year-on-year comparison ¡ª came in at 1.8 percent. While that rate was hardly stellar, it did top expectations for an increase of 1.6 percent.
Statistics for March also have looked more positive. Retail sales data showed a gain of 15.2 percent, compared with the same month a year ago, while industrial activity rose 11.9 percent. Both figures were slight accelerations from the February numbers, and both modestly topped analysts¡¯ forecasts.
Earlier in the week, trade data showed that import growth had stayed muted but that exports had regained some strength.
And on Thursday, the central bank announced that Chinese banks had issued a bit more than 1 trillion renminbi, or $160 billion, in new loans in March, well above what analysts had expected.
The lending surge was one of the main surprises coming out of the March statistics this week, Ms. Yao of Soci¨¦t¨¦ G¨¦n¨¦rale said, as it strongly suggested that the central bank was quietly but unequivocally relaxing credit quotas behind the scenes.
¡°If there is one country in the world where policy makers can flip the switch to steer growth, China is it,¡± Mr. Carbon of DBS said. ¡°And loan growth is their preferred policy tool.¡±
