TOKYO ¡ª Promising change and announcing a string of goals, ¡¯s chief executive, Kazuo Hirai, detailed on Thursday a revival plan that included a shift away from the company¡¯s unprofitable television business and a plan to cut 10,000 jobs.
by nimbler rivals, Sony is headed for its fourth consecutive year of losses, putting pressure on Mr. Hirai, who this month, to chart a turnaround.
¡°The time for Sony to change is now,¡± Mr. Hirai said during a news conference, his first since he succeeded Howard Stringer as chief. ¡°Sony will change.¡±
Once the epitome of Japanese innovation and technological prowess ¡ª as the maker of Walkman music players and Trinitron televisions ¡ª Sony has rapidly lost ground to American stalwarts like Apple and electronics manufacturers from South Korea and China.
Sony now makes a wide-ranging lineup of devices, from camcorders to car stereos.
Sony and other Japanese exporters have also been hamstrung by the persistent strength of , which is hovering near a record high against the dollar and has made the country¡¯s goods more expensive for consumers outside Japan.
Mr. Hirai said he would concentrate on three businesses: mobile devices, including smartphones and tablets; cameras and camcorders; and games.
Sony will especially focus on its Xperia line of smartphones, which Mr. Hirai said was fast becoming a hub in the technology ecosystem. He said he would make Sony a leader in the mobile field and triple sales in that business in three years, to 1.8 trillion yen, or $22 billion. Sony regained full control of its mobile offerings for $1.5 billion.
Sony will redouble efforts to integrate its Xperia smartphones with Sony tablets, personal computers and game consoles, Mr. Hirai said, allowing users seamless access to content across devices ¡ª a long-trumpeted but so far largely elusive strategy.
The company will also better leverage its vast catalog of music, movies and games to differentiate Sony gear, Mr. Hirai said. Infighting and concerns about piracy have hindered the company¡¯s content business, however, and Sony has not been able to replicate the success of the Apple iTunes online store.
Sony has said it intends to expand its popular PlayStation game network to offer music and video, replacing the disjointed lineup of content delivery platforms it now operates.
Sony will also invest to keep up with the fast-growing market for casual and downloadable games, Mr. Hirai said. He said he hoped to increase sales in games to 1 trillion yen ($12 billion) by the end of March 2015, from slightly more than 800 billion yen ($10 billion), and to more than double operating profit.
Mr. Hirai gave similarly bold goals for Sony¡¯s digital imaging business, which includes digital cameras and camcorders. He said the company aimed to increase sales to 1.5 trillion yen ($19 billion) in three years, from a bit more than 1 trillion yen ($12 billion), and to more than triple operating profit.
Missing from that core lineup was Sony¡¯s once-formidable television business, which trails the South Korean manufacturers Samsung and LG and has lost money for the last eight years.
Although Mr. Hirai said that Sony would not drop TVs, he said a 60 percent reduction in fixed costs was planned in that business. He declined to say whether Sony would close any factories.
Sony also declined to give specifics on where the 10,000 jobs would be cut, saying only that 3,000 would come from a small chemical business that is being spun off. The larger cuts represent about 6 percent of its global work force. The company said it would take a reorganization charge of 75 billion yen ($930 million) in the current financial year, which ends next March.
Mr. Hirai said Sony would seek growth in businesses in the medical field and was scouting for acquisitions and investments. Sony has emerged as one suitor for the medical equipment maker Olympus, which has been .
Over all, Sony aims to achieve total group sales of 8.5 trillion yen ($105 billion) with an operating margin of more than 5 percent over the next three financial years, Mr. Hirai said.
While the weak global economy has caused many consumers to delay purchases of nonessential goods, Sony¡¯s troubles highlight problems that are specific to the Japanese consumer electronics sector, too.
Once leaders in the world of televisions and camcorders, Japanese companies like Sony, Sharp, Panasonic and Toshiba have seen their edge in product development eroded and their market share diminished by rising competition.
Many of the manufacturers have been slow to gain traction in the growing smartphone and tablet computer market, analysts say. A recent research note from the firm Cantor Fitzgerald, for example, said Sony¡¯s pipeline was characterized by a ¡°lack of innovative, revolutionary (rather than evolutionary) products.¡±
At the same time, South Korean manufacturers like Samsung have emerged as major competitors.
