MADRID ¡ª The Spanish government warned on Friday that it would take unspecified retaliatory measures against Argentina if it proceeded with plans to take back control of YPF, the large oil and gas producer, from Repsol, its Spanish parent.
The warning came as Jos¨¦ Manuel Garcia-Margallo, the Spanish foreign minister, also announced that Spain had called on the European Commission, the United States Treasury and other governments in Latin America to support Spain in its efforts to prevent the nationalization of YPF.
Meanwhile, I?igo Mendez de Vigo, the Spanish secretary of state for European affairs, warned in a radio interview that Argentina could become ¡°an international pariah¡± if such a nationalization went ahead.
The dispute with Argentina could not have come at a worse time for Repsol and the government in Madrid, which is already struggling with Spain¡¯s second recession in three years, as well as facing soaring borrowing costs amid concerns among investors about whether Spain will be the next euro economy to require a bailout.
For Repsol, meanwhile, YPF has come to account for a third of its profits and 42 percent of its estimated reserves of crude oil.
Repsol took control of YPF in 1999 and owns 57 percent of its equity.
The YPF takeover was one of several forays by Spain¡¯s largest banks and industrial companies into Latin America. These investments have recently helped soften the blow of crumbling earnings at home.
Independent of what measures the Spanish government might take against Argentina, a nationalization would also push Repsol shareholders to start ¡°an intense judicial battle in Madrid, Brussels, Buenos Aires and New York to defend themselves against an attack on their property,¡± said Javier Cremades, who has been a lawyer for Repsol shareholders and has also worked for the company. Mr. Cremades is chairman of Cremades & Calvo-Sotelo, a Madrid law firm.
Shares of Repsol YPF fell 49 euro cents on Friday, or 2.73 percent, to 17.47 euros. The stock has been tumbling since the start of the year, in large part reflecting concerns among investors about the future of YPF, as the government in Buenos Aires gradually intensified its criticism of Repsol, accusing the company of not investing enough in Argentina and instead paying too much of its profits in dividends.
Mr. Garcia-Margallo, the foreign minister, suggested Friday that any nationalization would be seen as ¡°an aggression¡± against the Spanish government as well. Still, he said that Argentina¡¯s ambassador, whom he had summoned for a meeting, had not made clear whether such a nationalization plan would go ahead, amid conflicting reports from Buenos Aires.
¡°We are in a moment of uncertainty which we want to use to call again for dialogue and negotiation,¡± he said.
