WITH 10,000 Americans turning 65 every day, financial advisers say that more than ever, people who are thinking about second acts need a life plan to account for living expenses, and also health, tax, investment and estate issues.
¡°Things are different now,¡± said Mackey McNeill, a certified public accountant and the founder of Mackey Advisors of Covington, Ky. ¡°The old rules don¡¯t apply.¡±
With so much complexity, retirement specialists say, plans need to be comprehensive and dynamic, to be ready for the unexpected. There is urgency this year more than most because of significant tax changes scheduled to take effect in 2013.
Andrea Millar, who leads the personal financial planning division of the American Institute of CPAs, noted that the highest ordinary tax rate would rise to 39.6 percent from 35 percent unless the Bush-era tax rules are extended.
Other changes are afoot, Ms. Millar said, as special tax rates on capital gains and qualified dividends are set to expire; capital gains may rise to 20 percent in 2013 from 15 percent, or 10 percent from zero, depending on income level. Capital gains rates on qualified dividends may revert to ordinary income rates. A new 3.8 percent surtax on investment income for some individuals will add to the other tax increases in 2013, she added.
¡°There is so much up in the air, you can¡¯t wait to plan,¡± Ms. Millar said. ¡°You have to have a game plan to be ready to act by the end of the year.¡±
John O. McManus, a trust and estate lawyer in Manhattan, suggested that some people should consider converting their to Roth I.R.A.¡¯s to take advantage of the 2012 tax rate. A Roth I.R.A. is funded with after-tax money. Unlike other retirement accounts, Roths have no minimum distribution requirements after age 70 1/2, the accounts compound free of tax and distributions are tax-free. For those reasons, Mr. McManus said he was recommending Roth conversions to his clients.
Even so, said Barbara Weltman, a tax lawyer in Millwood, N.Y., ¡°Many people are reluctant to pay one penny more now, regardless of what tax benefit they will get in the future.¡±
But, she added, there is another compelling reason to do it now, though. For people on Medicare, adjusted gross income two years prior can result in having higher Part B and Part D premiums, said Ms. Weltman, a contributing editor to the book ¡°J. K. Lasser¡¯s Your Income Tax 2012.¡±
¡°If you convert, you eliminate the required minimum distributions,¡± she said, ¡°and that will bring down the income during your Medicare years and potentially save you significantly on Medicare premiums.¡±
By 2030, when the more than 70 million Americans born from 1946 to 1964 all will have turned 65, 18 percent of the population will be at least that age, population projections. Today, just 13 percent of Americans are 65 and older.
People face crucial choices when it comes to tapping into . If they collect Social Security at 62 and earn income, Ms. Millar said, their benefits may be reduced. Also, they would be receiving a reduced benefit at 62, computed as a percentage of what they would receive at full retirement age, she said.
To maximize Social Security benefits, advisers say, it is best to wait until age 70. There is no penalty for earning additional income at full retirement, Ms. Millar said.
Not everyone can or wants to wait that long, however. ¡°People feel if they don¡¯t start they won¡¯t get the benefits at all,¡± Ms. Weltman said. ¡°Personal health issues could be a factor in when you start collecting benefits.¡±
David Tyrie, head of personal wealth and retirement for Bank of America Merrill Lynch, says baby boomers have to face big questions that previous generations did not. Longevity and the desire to work later in life are redefining the notion of retirement, he added.
Three of four respondents in a of Americans with $250,000 in investable assets viewed retirement as a second act. Of them, 30 percent planned to cycle between work and leisure after reaching 65.
¡°It¡¯s pretty basic,¡± Mr. Tyrie said. ¡°The golden years? Those days are gone.¡±
