WASHINGTON ¡ª A fund to support homeowners in the communities hit hardest by the collapse of the housing bubble has disbursed just 3 percent of its budget and aided only 30,640 homeowners in the two years since its creation, according to a report released on Thursday by a federal watchdog office.
The Hardest Hit Fund, which was created in the spring of 2010, grants money to state housing finance agencies for efforts to help families that are facing . It has ¡°experienced significant delay¡± because of ¡°a lack of comprehensive planning¡± by the and limited participation by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the large mortgage servicers, said the report by the special inspector general for the .
¡°TARP wasn¡¯t supposed to be just a bank bailout,¡± said Christy L. Romero, the special inspector general for TARP, in an interview. ¡°It was specifically designed with the goal of helping homeowners, and our concern is that that goal may not be met.¡±
As of the end of 2011, the Hardest Hit Fund had spent $217.4 million out of its $7.6 billion budget, the report found. The program is intended to reach homeowners who are unemployed, or living in areas with high unemployment rates or steeply falling home values.
The report is just the latest to criticize the Obama administration¡¯s efforts to relieve homeowners battered by the nationwide drop in housing prices and the broader . The office of the special inspector general has repeatedly criticized Treasury¡¯s management of the Home Affordable Modification Program, Washington¡¯s main initiative to prevent foreclosures.
The Treasury Department had estimated that the program would reach three million to four million homeowners. It has aided fewer than a million, though the program has been completing more and more permanent modifications recently.
The report on the Hardest Hit Fund was requested by Representative Darrell Issa, Republican of California and chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee.
It cited a lack of planning and leadership by the Treasury Department as the reason so little money has been spent. The special inspector general said that Treasury had not set clear measures for the number of homeowners to be reached, and when.
The report also argued that the federal government had not used its significant influence over large mortgage servicers and Fannie and Freddie to induce them to participate in the state-devised and state-managed initiatives.
The Hardest Hit Fund ¡°is a TARP Program, and Treasury is the steward over TARP,¡± the report says.
The Treasury Department sought to rebut the criticism of its management of the Hardest Hit Fund, saying that the states¡¯ programs had taken considerable time to set up and that the programs had started reaching more homeowners in recent months.
¡°This report misses the mark by not acknowledging the hard work of participating states and the innovative ways they are preventing foreclosures in their local communities,¡± Timothy G. Massad, the assistant secretary for financial stability, said in a statement.
¡°The Hardest Hit Fund is helping states address some of the most difficult problems caused by the housing crisis in ways that suit local conditions and have already kept tens of thousands of families in their homes,¡± Mr. Massad added.
The Hardest Hit Fund allocates money to states for programs to help homeowners. To receive money, states were to meet certain conditions: a 20 percent decline in house prices, a high proportion of the state population living in counties with an unemployment rate above 12 percent or an unemployment rate above the national average.
Eighteen states, including California, Nevada and Florida, as well as the District of Columbia received money and built programs to help local homeowners. Treasury signed off on programs that reduced the mortgage principal of underwater homeowners; reduced or paid off second liens, like home equity lines of credit; aided unemployed homeowners; and helped people losing their homes.
But Fannie and Freddie, which back many American mortgages, directed servicers to participate in a small subset of programs, like those providing mortgage assistance for the unemployed.
And states lacked a way to force the large mortgage servicers to engage with the programs. An official for Florida¡¯s home finance agency told the special inspector general, ¡°The $1 billion has been a nice carrot to use for servicers in Florida, but there is no stick with the carrot to force servicers to participate.¡±
Thus, many of the state initiatives financed by the Hardest Hit Fund have failed to reach significant numbers of homeowners thus far. In New Jersey, for instance, just 54 households had benefited as of the end of 2011. In California, where 48,422 houses received a foreclosure notice , the program has aided just 4,357 homeowners.
Programs financed by the Hardest Hit Fund have been ramping up recently in some states. In Michigan, for instance, the number of participants climbed 40 percent during the fourth quarter of 2011, and the amount of money disbursed increased by half. Nearly 97 percent of the early beneficiaries continued to own their homes a year after receiving assistance.
The Treasury Department said that the states were better tailoring the programs for their homeowners¡¯ needs and reaching more of them.
¡°The states can change their programs,¡± said Ms. Romero, the special inspector general. ¡°So it¡¯s not too late for the states to figure out how to use these funds. That¡¯s the dynamic nature of the program, and that¡¯s what needs to happen.¡±
