Michelle Harvey, an employee of the , has a security badge to a site that used to be considered enemy territory: the headquarters of in Bentonville, Ark.
An environmentalist in Bentonville sounds like the premise for a low-budget reality show, but Wal-Mart has been courting environmental groups and seeking their input on its policies in the seven years since it first announced a sustainability program.
The company, the nation¡¯s biggest retailer, has met some environmental goals and missed others. On Monday, it plans to announce that it now reuses or recycles more than 80 percent of the waste produced in its domestic stores and in its other United States operations. That is up from 64 percent as of 2009, but it is short of the zero-waste goal the company hopes to get to.
Wal-Mart¡¯s environmental push has helped transform public opinion of the company, easing the way for it to open stores in urban areas like Chicago and Los Angeles. About a quarter of Americans now have a favorable impression of Wal-Mart, about double the percentage that did in 2007 (the earliest available figure for Wal-Mart), according to the YouGov BrandIndex, which measures consumers¡¯ impressions of companies and products.
Before Wal-Mart announced the environmental initiative in 2005, H. Lee Scott, the chief executive, reviewed the legal and public relations problems the company was having. It had paid millions of dollars in fines for violating local pollution laws, and was facing a lawsuit claiming that Wal-Mart discriminated against women. Mr. Scott wondered if behaving differently could enhance the company¡¯s reputation, . That year, Mr. Scott announced a wide-ranging plan to lessen the retailer¡¯s environmental impact. Wal-Mart has issued regular updates on its progress since then.
But some environmental and shop-local groups contend that the company¡¯s business model remains inherently anti-environment.
¡°Wal-Mart¡¯s price pressure on manufacturers is undermining the durability and quality of products, which has contributed to a sharp increase in how much Americans buy and how much we discard,¡± said Stacy Mitchell, senior researcher for the Institute for Local Self-Reliance. ¡°The majority of what the company does is designed to accelerate consumption.¡±
Vonda Lockwood, senior director of operations who handles the waste program at Wal-Mart, said she had heard the objections.
¡°My question is, ¡®So do we do nothing then?¡¯ I feel like we are a retailer, we¡¯re here to be a retailer, and in doing that we¡¯re trying to be good partners as a retailer,¡± she said.
In the report to be released next week, Wal-Mart will describe a mixed degree of progress on the goals Mr. Scott outlined seven years ago. Mr. Scott, who retired in 2009 as chief executive, serves on Wal-Mart¡¯s board of directors.
Mr. Scott initially said he wanted no waste from the stores to go to landfills. Ms. Lockwood said the company now recycles things like aluminum and shrink wrap, reuses items like wood pallets, donates usable food to charity and turns other food into animal feed or compost.
Though it now recycles or otherwise reuses 80 percent of waste from its operations in the United States, it¡¯s the remaining 20 percent that poses difficult problems, Ms. Lockwood said. ¡°Now we¡¯re down to the really hard stuff, for example, bathroom and parking lot trash that we¡¯re never going to ask our associates to sort,¡± she said, adding that the company was figuring out how to deal with that.
Mr. Scott said in 2005 that he wanted to reduce greenhouse gases from its stores by 20 percent over the next seven years, the end of 2012. Wal-Mart has so far reduced greenhouse gases at its stores that were open in 2005 by 12.74 percent, according to the report. He said he wanted to double the of its trucks in the next 10 years. The company has improved fuel efficiency (which it defines as cases shipped per gallons burned) by 69 percent versus 2005 levels.
The company said it wanted to be supplied by 100 percent renewable energy, and is now at 15 percent renewable energy globally.
The Environmental Defense Fund and other groups have been advising Wal-Mart on its changes. For instance, Ms. Harvey said, her group had told Wal-Mart that incinerating trash was not an appropriate way to get to zero waste, and Wal-Mart ceased burning almost all of its trash as a result.
The partnership between the fund and Wal-Mart started with Mr. Scott, who brought in the fund to provide feedback on his environmental goals.
¡°If you¡¯re serious about tackling environmental challenges, you can¡¯t afford not to talk to anybody of that size,¡± said Jon Coifman, who works on corporate partnerships for the Environmental Defense Fund. The head of the fund took Mr. Scott on a trip to Mount Washington in New Hampshire, where the two bunked in a cabin and discussed how would affect products that Wal-Mart sold, including coffee, Ms. Harvey said.
The fund opened an office in Bentonville in 2007 so it could have direct access to Wal-Mart. It does not accept contributions from Wal-Mart or other corporations it works with.
Ms. Mitchell of the Institute for Local Self-Reliance argued that Wal-Mart¡¯s political contributions tended to favor anti-environmental politicians. Ms. Harvey said she ¡°can¡¯t disagree with those concerns,¡± but changing ¡°practice on the ground can have far greater impact much more quickly than the political process.¡±
As for Ms. Mitchell¡¯s concerns about Wal-Mart¡¯s business model, Ms. Harvey said that ¡°a retail model in this country, starting back in the ¡¯50s, was planned obsolescence and increased consumption, so I don¡¯t think you can lay the burden on Wal-Mart.¡±
In Bentonville, part of a fiercely Republican Benton County, where in the 2008 election, there were lots of ¡°closet environmentalists,¡± said Ms. Harvey, who moved from the Washington area to work there.
¡°If you talk about core values ¡ª using things well, protecting the planet for kids,¡± she said, ¡°there¡¯s no disagreement.¡±
¡°If you start talking political parties, there¡¯s a lot of divergence,¡± she said.
