John Anagnost joined XplusOne, New York, in a new post, vice president of sales for the Eastern region. He had been president at Reprise Media, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Joseph Benarroch joined the New York office of Facebook as agency development lead for the Interpublic Group of Companies. He previously worked at Interpublic, in posts that included senior vice president and global director for corporate affairs.
Scott Berwitz joined Mindshare North America, New York, part of the Mindshare unit of GroupM, as corporate communications director. He assumes duties from John Wolfe, who continues as director for communications at GroupM. Mr. Berwitz had been director for corporate communications at Horizon Media, New York. GroupM is owned by WPP.
Justin Booth-Clibborn joined the New York office of Bartle Bogle Hegarty as head of integrated production, succeeding Lora Schulson, who left for a similar post at Wieden & Kennedy. Mr. Booth-Clibborn had been chief marketing officer and managing partner at Psyop.
The John Caples International Awards for 2012, honoring excellence in direct marketing creative work, were presented in New York. There were 22 gold, 42 silver and 50 bronze awards bestowed in 31 categories. The Best of Show award went to the Shackleton Group for a campaign called ¡°Unexpected Luggage¡± for Spanair. Agencies that are part of BBDO Worldwide, owned by the Omnicom Group, tied for most awards, with 11 apiece: BBDO New York and a team composed of agencies in New Zealand, Colenso BBDO and AIM Proximity.
Matthew Childs rejoined GSD&M, Austin, Tex., part of the Omnicom Group, as senior vice president for experience and insights. He succeeds David Matathia, who left to join Hyundai Motor America as director for advertising. Mr. Childs has worked for agencies like FKQ Marketing, Highmark and Razorfish and was director for interactive at GSD&M from 1998 to 2000.
Eugene Chung joined Firstborn, New York, part of what had been known as the Dentsu Network West unit of Dentsu, in a new post, director for strategy. He had been strategic development director at Dentsu Network West, which has been absorbed into a unit of Dentsu named Dentsu Network.
DiGennaro Communications, New York, expanded to the West Coast by opening an office in Santa Monica, Calif., which will be led by Alysha Walker, who rejoins the agency as vice president and group account director of DGC West; she had been handling corporate communications at Cohn & Wolfe, part of WPP. Also, DiGennaro formed an alliance with Eulogy, a British public relations agency, and hired two employees in New York: Elkie Griffin, account director, who had been corporate communications manager at the New York office of DraftFCB, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, and Sally O¡¯Dowd, vice president and group account director, who had worked at Publicis Groupe agencies like Arc Worldwide, Leo Burnett, the MSL Group and Razorfish.
Expedia, Bellevue, Wash., selected 180 Los Angeles, part of the 180 unit of the Omnicom Group, as agency of record for . The assignment, with spending estimated at $45 million, had been handled by the Martin Agency, Richmond, Va., part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, which did not take part in a review for the account.
Grey Goose vodka, sold by the Bacardi Global Brands unit of Bacardi, chose Mullen, Boston, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, to handle its worldwide creative account. The assignment, with spending estimated at $15 million, had been handled by , New York, which will continue to work on content initiatives and branded entertainment projects like the television series ¡°Iconoclasts.¡±
Brian Gruske joined the New York office of Sunset magazine, part of the Time Inc. unit of Time Warner, as publisher. He succeeds Peter Medwid, who had been publisher of Sunset and another Time Inc. magazine, Coastal Living, before he left to join Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, New York, as senior vice president and publisher of Martha Stewart Living magazine. Mr. Gruske had most recently been vice president and publisher at Shape magazine, part of American Media.
Jeff Guaracino joined the Atlantic City Alliance, a new nonprofit tourist marketing organization for Atlantic City, as chief strategy officer. He had been vice president for communications at the Greater Philadelphia Tourism Marketing Corporation.
