For music fans, more and more consumption these days happens through online streaming services like Pandora, Spotify and TuneIn. But when it comes to live shows there¡¯s not much out there: for the most part, only big festivals and promoters have had the resources to send as-it-happens audio over the Internet.
That may be changing, however, as more musicians like Ryan Montbleau experiment with streaming on a budget. Mr. Montbleau, 34, is a typical journeyman musician, leading his group, the Ryan Montbleau Band, in feel-good retro funk for about 200 club dates a year.
Since January, he has been webcasting all of his concerts live through a system worthy of Rube Goldberg: after capturing the audio on a mixing console, the band bounces the signal to two apps and then to an , which transmits the show to the band¡¯s Web to hear. So far the online audience has numbered in the dozens, Mr. Montbleau said, but it¡¯s growing fast.
¡°The other night we had more people listening to the stream than were at the show,¡± he said before one recent show in Manhattan, as the band¡¯s sound engineer tweaked the levels during a sound check.
It is relatively rare for bands like Mr. Montbleau¡¯s to use such audio streams. The Web site Daytrotter, which makes stripped-down recordings with touring bands, beams live sessions to registered members. Wolfgang¡¯s Vault, the concert archive site that owns a majority share of Daytrotter, streams some shows from clubs like the Living Room in New York.
To stream his band¡¯s shows, Mr. Montbleau¡¯s keyboardist and resident techie, Jason Cohen, found a way to link Audio Hijack Pro and Nicecast, two apps made by the software company Rogue Amoeba. It wasn¡¯t hacking exactly, but the connection was unusual enough that Rogue Amoeba¡¯s chief executive, Paul Kafasis, asked Mr. Cohen how he had pulled it off.
¡°They combined two of our tools in a way we haven¡¯t seen before,¡± Mr. Kafasis said in a telephone interview. ¡°And what they are doing with it, broadcasting live shows, we haven¡¯t seen a whole lot of.¡±
Aside from the technology, another barrier for bands has been the tangle of necessary rights and permissions. Historically, promoters have sometimes demanded a payment or royalty ¡ª usually called an origination fee ¡ª for a live recording or broadcast. Mr. Montbleau and Mr. Cohen said their streams had been approved by each club manager ¡ª but one.
¡°One venue owner said he didn¡¯t want bands streaming to fans that didn¡¯t pay to get into the show,¡± Mr. Cohen said. ¡°I respected that. And then I just used my iPhone and did it on the sly.¡±
In addition to the streams, which are free, the band also posts its live recordings after every show, with payment optional. So far these efforts haven¡¯t contributed a great deal to the group¡¯s bottom line, Mr. Montbleau said, but that¡¯s not his goal anyway.
¡°In the long run I hope it¡¯s just going to bring more people out to the shows,¡± he said, ¡°because they want to be there when it happens.¡±
