As the nation¡¯s economy slowly recovers and emerges as a crucial issue in the presidential campaign, lawmakers are facing growing pressure to raise the minimum wage, which was last increased at the federal level to $7.25 an hour in July 2009.
State legislators in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Illinois and elsewhere are pushing to raise the minimum wage above the federal level in their own states, arguing that $7.25 an hour is too meager for anyone to live on.
Massachusetts lawmakers are pushing for a big jump, with the Legislature¡¯s joint committee on labor that would raise the minimum to $10 an hour, which would leapfrog Washington State, whose $9.04 minimum is the nation¡¯s highest.
Voters in Missouri may be asked to vote on a minimum wage referendum in November.
These moves are giving momentum to an effort to persuade Congress to embrace a higher national minimum wage. Some liberal and labor groups, capitalizing on the energy and message of the Occupy Wall Street movement, are urging Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa and chairman of the Senate Labor Committee, to head a Congressional effort to raise the federal minimum to $9.80 an hour by 2014.
Congress last passed a bill to increase minimum wages in 2006, phasing in higher rates over several years. Although some states raise the minimum wage automatically every year as the cost of living increases, federal law does not provides for an automatic increase.
Many Democrats and their labor allies say the time is right to push for another increase, and not just because it is hard to live on the $15,080 a year earned by a person working full time at minimum wage. They say a public debate now over the merits of increasing wages is bound to put many Republicans on the defensive during an election year and would encourage low-income Americans ¡ª an important part of the Democratic base ¡ª to go to the polls this November.
¡°It¡¯s always good to surface an issue that captures voters¡¯ enthusiasm and distinguishes the bad guys and the good guys,¡± said Jen Kern, minimum wage campaign coordinator at the National Employment Law Project, an advocacy group for low-wage workers.
The business community is not at all happy about these developments and has warned President Obama, Democratic lawmakers and labor groups that with weak job growth, the time is definitely not right to raise the minimum wage.
¡°It¡¯s a classic election-year ploy to make the Democrats look like they¡¯re protecting low-income workers,¡± said Randal K. Johnson, senior vice president for labor issues at the United States Chamber of Commerce. ¡°I think it¡¯s well understood that raising the minimum wage hurts workers on the lower end of the pay scale in that it does kill jobs.¡±
But backers of a higher minimum wage disagree on the economics, pointing to studies that found that an increase in minimum wages did not result in a reduction in jobs. Ms. Kern argued that raising the minimum wage would even stimulate the economy. ¡°You ask business why they¡¯re not hiring. They say it¡¯s because no one is buying anything,¡± she said. ¡°Well, a higher minimum wage would give people more money to spend.¡±
In 2010, 1.8 million hourly workers earned exactly the prevailing federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour, according to federal data. About 2.5 million had wages below the minimum, in part because of exemptions under the law for certain categories of workers like many students.
Analysis by the Economic Policy Institute, a left-leaning research organization, suggests that raising the federal minimum wage to $9.80 would lift pay for more than 28 million Americans, increase the gross domestic product by more than $25 billion and create the equivalent of more than 100,000 full-time jobs.
Advocates for a higher wage note that the issue receives strong public support. In a , 78 percent of New Yorkers polled supported an increase, while 20 percent opposed it. Even Republicans favored an increase, 53 percent to 43 percent.
Ms. Kern¡¯s group along with other labor organizations like Interfaith Worker Justice, the Service Employees International Union and Restaurant Opportunities Centers United are mobilizing to press Congress to take action.
