OTTAWA ¡ª The offices of SNC-Lavalin, the Canadian construction and engineering company that had close ties to the regime of Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan dictator, was searched by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police on Friday.
Employees were told by e-mail to evacuate the building, in downtown Montreal, as the police moved in with a search warrant. While leaving, some employees told reporters that the search appeared to be concentrated on a floor with the executive offices.
In a , SNC-Lavalin said that the search warrant was related to ¡°certain individuals who are not or are no longer employed by the company.¡± It added that it was cooperating with all investigations.
A spokesman for the mounted police confirmed that the raid was under way but declined to discuss the investigation.
Late last month, Pierre Duhaime, then the chief executive, left the company after that he had authorized 56 million Canadian dollars in unauthorized payments to unidentified agents. While the company does not know the purpose of those payments, it said that they did not appear to involve Libya.
In February, SNC-Lavalin fired the head of its construction unit and a senior financial executive in that operation and suggested that they had failed to ¡°comply with our code of ethics and business conduct.¡± St¨¦phane Roy, the financial executive who was dismissed, hired Cynthia Vanier, a Canadian consultant, to travel to Libya, where the company was building a prison and other projects, to produce a five-page report that was critical of the NATO-led bombing campaign in support of Libyan rebels.
In November, Ms. Vanier was arrested in Mexico on allegations that she was involved in a plot to smuggle Saadi el-Qaddafi, the former Libyan dictator¡¯s son, into Mexico. She denies the allegations and remains jailed.
This month, SNC-Lavalin said its construction unit had been temporarily suspended from bidding on projects financed by the World Bank, relates to unspecified allegations about bidding on a bridge project in Bangladesh.
