WASHINGTON (Reuters) ¡ª The number of Americans filing for jobless benefits hit a two-month high last week, and more applications were received in the previous week than initially reported, the Labor Department said on Thursday.
13,000 last week, to a seasonally adjusted 380,000, the Labor Department said on Thursday, defying economists¡¯ expectations for a drop to 355,000. The previous week¡¯s count was revised to show 10,000 more applications than previously reported.
While economists cautioned against reading too much into the report, saying problems adjusting the data for seasonal fluctuations around Easter might have pushed last week¡¯s figure higher, they said it nonetheless provided a worrying signal.
¡°It certainly bolsters the view that things are starting to slow down,¡± said Tim Quinlan, an economist at Wells Fargo Securities in Charlotte, N.C.
The four-week moving average for new claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends, rose moderately.
In another report, 12.4 percent, to $46 billion in February, as exports hit a record high. It was the biggest month-to-month decline in the trade shortfall since May 2009.
The shrinking of the deficit prompted economists to lift their estimates for economic growth in the first quarter. Goldman Sachs now sees the gross domestic product expanding at a 2.5 percent annual pace instead of the 2.3 percent pace it had estimated earlier.
The economy grew at a 3 percent rate in the fourth quarter.
A third report showed little sign of inflation pressures. The after advancing 0.4 percent in February, while wholesale prices excluding those for food and energy rose 0.3 percent.
That should allow the Federal Reserve to keep interest rates low and even embark on a third round of asset purchases or should job growth completely stall.
on Thursday that the central bank was gathering more data to determine whether last month¡¯s weak employment report was just a weather-related setback or a sign the recovery was losing momentum again.
¡°The somewhat softer March labor market report that was released last Friday may reflect the earlier positive influence of the mild weather on job creation in January and February, although other less sanguine interpretations are also plausible,¡± he said.
Last month, more than a third of the rise in the core was attributed to rising costs for light motor trucks. Higher prices for passenger cars, soaps and detergents also contributed to the advance.
In the 12 months through March, wholesale prices increased 2.8 percent, the smallest increase since June 2010, after advancing 3.3 percent in February.
