Encouraging signs from two of the most important zones of the world economy, China and Europe, drove the Dow Jones industrial average up 181 points on Thursday, one of its biggest gains this year.
China¡¯s central bank reported a surprising increase in loans in March, easing concerns about a sudden slowdown in the Chinese economy, whose growth has helped pull the globe out of .
Italy¡¯s government easily sold $6.4 billion in bonds to investors. After the auction, borrowing rates for Italy fell, European stock indexes reversed earlier declines and worries about the continental eased, at least for the day.
¡°European governments have a mountain of debt coming due early this year,¡± said John Canally, investment strategist at LPL Financial in Boston. ¡°Some of what you¡¯re seeing today in markets is a bit of relief that they¡¯re working through it.¡±
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 181.19 points, or 1.4 percent, to close at 12,986.58.
After the market closed, Google reported earnings that were ahead of analysts¡¯ estimates and said it would issue a new class of nonvoting stock to shareholders. Google rose slightly in after-hours trading.
On Wednesday, the stock market snapped out of a five-day slump, its longest and deepest of the year. Investors were worried about European debt, slower job growth and the Federal Reserve¡¯s resistance to taking further steps to bolster the economy.
¡°I think the fear was overdone,¡± said Scott J. Brown, chief economist at Raymond James. ¡°This is the manic nature of the stock market. The sentiment seems to shift back and forth day by day. Either the economy is booming or it¡¯s completely falling apart.¡±
In other trading, the Standard & Poor¡¯s 500-stock index rose 18.86 points, or 1.4 percent, to 1,387.57. The Nasdaq composite index gained 39.09 points, or 1.3 percent, to 3,055.55.
Materials companies led the S.& P. 500 higher, with energy and industrial stocks close behind. Hewlett-Packard gained 7.2 percent after a study reported that shipments of personal computers unexpectedly rose almost 2 percent at the start of the year.
The nation¡¯s trade deficit shrank in February to $46 billion, a four-month low, as exports were strong. The shrinking trade deficit raised the possibility that the economy had grown more rapidly in the first quarter than previously expected.
United States stocks opened higher, despite a rise in weekly unemployment claims. The Labor Department reported that applications for unemployment benefits increased to 380,000 last week, the highest level in two months.
Among stocks making big moves, Avid Technology, a maker of equipment for recording music and video, fell 17 percent after it said it expected to post a loss in the first quarter because of weaker demand from amateur musicians and disc jockeys.
McKesson, a drug provider, rose 3.9 percent after reporting that the Department of Veterans Affairs had agreed to keep McKesson as its main drug supplier. The department runs one of the country¡¯s largest health care systems.
The positive news from China also encouraged investors to move to riskier assets with higher potential payoffs from those considered safe, like Treasury instruments. The Treasury¡¯s benchmark 10-year note fell 6/32, to 99 16/32, and the yield rose to 2.06 percent from 2.04 percent late Wednesday.
