THE commercials showing now for Denny¡¯s depict homey restaurants and feature the slogan ¡°America¡¯s Diner Is Always Open.¡± The campaign, by Gotham, New York, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, is humorous but far from edgy, befitting a family restaurant.
But in an effort to pitch Denny¡¯s to consumers aged 18 to 25, the company is producing a Web series that strikes a decidedly more provocative tone.
The series, features the comedian Dave Koechner, the ¡°Saturday Night Live¡± alumnus and a star of movies including ¡°Anchorman,¡± who interviews celebrities while they share a booth at a Denny¡¯s. ¡°You climbed Mount Kilimanjaro,¡± Mr. Koechner tells his guest, the actress Jessica Biel,. ¡°Let¡¯s say we¡¯re trapped on the mountain together, both of us, we¡¯re freezing, and we need to share bodily warmth. Do you think it would get romantic?¡±
In a video scheduled to be introduced on June 6 featuring Andy Richter, the comedian and Conan O¡¯Brien sidekick, Mr. Koechner presents him with a plate squirted with ketchup and mustard and explains it is a Rorschach test.
Mr. Richter puts on reading glasses and ponders the plate. He slaps Mr. Koechner. ¡°How dare you?¡± says Mr. Richter. ¡°I told you that in confidence!¡±
The unscripted videos, between three and four minutes long, are released on CollegeHumor.com and on Denny¡¯s Facebook page. Conceived by Gotham, they are , a production company headed by the actors Jason Bateman and Will Arnett. DumbDumb produces branded content, marketing parlance for videos that feature brands but eschew overt sales pitches.
In the videos, set in a Denny¡¯s on Sunset Boulevard in Los Angeles, the only direct reference to the brand is in the closing seconds of the episodes, which feature its logo and slogan.
?
¡°Always Open¡± installments, which began appearing online in March 2011, include interviews with Mr. Bateman and Mr. Arnett. They collectively have more than six million views.
Also featured is the , who makes a casual reference to an embarrassing medical problem. Such talk in a Denny¡¯s commercial might infuriate some consumers, but the company reports receiving no negative responses from any videos.
Frances Allen, chief marketing officer for Denny¡¯s, said the brand avoided controversy by releasing videos on CollegeHumor.com, where much content is provocative.
¡°We¡¯re really tight with our targeting, and that is why we home in on CollegeHumor.com,¡± Ms. Allen said. ¡°Being mindful of not being offensive, brands have to take the guardrails off a little.¡±
Engaging younger consumers, who flit from screen to screen, can confound advertisers. According to Inc., and cited in Advertising Age, during nonworking hours, consumers in their 20s switch their attention from one media device to another an average of 27 times an hour.
The Web videos, in contrast, represent an ¡°engaging brand moment for millennials,¡± said Ms. Allen, using a term for those born around the early 1980s to mid-1990s. Even without highlighting the menu, she continued, the series ¡°communicates our brand message that diners are really welcoming places where everyone can come as they are.¡±
Denny¡¯s, which declined to reveal the cost of the effort, spent $63.9 million on advertising in 2011, according to the Kantar Media unit of WPP.
With about 1,680 restaurants in the United States and abroad, the company was hobbled by the recession but appears to be recovering. Same-restaurant sales dropped 5.2 percent in 2009 from the previous year, and another 3.7 percent in 2010, but they increased 0.7 percent in 2011.
Another common industry measure, average guest check, rose 0.6 percent in 2011 after declining 1.7 percent in 2010.
?
¡°I love commercials and think that the hacky clich¨¦ of them being ¡®mini movies¡¯ is really true,¡± said Mr. Bateman. The actor, who appeared with Mr. Arnett in the television comedy ¡°Arrested Development,¡± said he was an ¡°aspiring filmmaker¡± but lacked the aptitude for conventional commercials.
DumbDumb, which is two years old, let him cut his teeth on directing comedy sketches and improvisation, which ¡°is something that I didn¡¯t feel apologetic about asking for the keys to,¡± Mr. Batemen said.
That guests on the show do not gush about Denny¡¯s is a practical matter as well as an aesthetic one.
¡°Not only would that be distasteful to me and the friends we¡¯re soliciting, but it also would trigger an endorsement fee,¡± said Mr. Bateman. ¡°Quite frankly, the people we¡¯re asking to play with us wouldn¡¯t be open to that, and the brand wouldn¡¯t be open to paying that.¡±
If Denny¡¯s ¡°had been more heavy-handed with pushing an offer, they may not have had the same level of distribution with the content,¡± said Teal Newland, vice president of sales , a site for discovering and sharing Web material.
Ms. Newland said that rather than banking on the videos going viral based on entertainment alone, Denny¡¯s takes the more effective approach of releasing them on CollegeHumor.com, where they will find a likely audience, and working with performers popular on social media. (Among those who have tweeted about the videos are Ms. Silverman, with 2.8 million Twitter followers, Mr. Arnett, with 523,000, and Mr. Bateman, with 504,000.)
¡°If you want to reach millennials, you want to go where they¡¯re living online,¡± she said. ¡°You want a very tight distribution plan to be baked in the moment you start concepting the show.¡±
