PARIS ¡ª In his six years at the helm of , Europe¡¯s largest aerospace and military contractor, Louis Gallois has made it a large part of his mission to push his company deeper into emerging markets to offset flagging demand and high production costs at home.
Yet as his tenure as chief executive winds to a close next month, Europe¡¯s protracted economic malaise and its long-term consequences for Europe¡¯s manufacturers are constantly in his thoughts.
¡°European industry is facing huge challenges; the world is completely changing,¡± Mr. Gallois said in an interview. ¡°Emerging countries are becoming not only the factories of the world but also the laboratories of the world, which is a question mark for us.¡±
As Europe struggles to emerge from its crisis, longtime industrialists like Mr. Gallois are calling on their peers to ensure that, in the inexorable march toward globalization, the region does not succumb to a Japan-style hollowing out of its industrial base through the permanent transfer of its skilled jobs overseas.
¡°A country can¡¯t develop itself, can¡¯t be independent, can¡¯t balance its external accounts without industry,¡± said Mr. Gallois, 68, who recently agreed to lead a new research organization to draft recommendations for reviving Europe¡¯s manufacturing competitiveness.
¡°Industry brings innovation,¡± he said. ¡°It brings high-technology jobs.¡±
Mr. Gallois¡¯s company, and its division in particular, has certainly tried to do its part in that regard. Despite a painful reorganization that came after the nearly three-year delay in the development of the Airbus A380, which resulted in the loss of 10,000 jobs from 2007 to 2008, European Aeronautic Defense and Space has continued to invest heavily in its European factories as demand for its airplanes and helicopters has surged in regions like Asia and the Middle East.
EADS employs 122,000 people worldwide and intends to hire 9,000 this year ¡ª up from 5,000 new employees in 2011 ¡ª as it increases development of its coming wide-body jet, the A350 XWB, expected in late 2013.
Most of those jobs have remained in Europe. But a growing share of the company¡¯s expansion under Mr. Gallois¡¯s watch has taken place overseas and will continue to do so. EADS aims to have 20 percent of its employees based outside Western Europe by 2020, up from about 8 percent in 2011 and 5 percent in 2007.
Many of those jobs will be in countries like India and China, where Airbus opened a final assembly line for its best-selling A320 family of passenger jets in 2008. The plant, in Tianjin, assembles three planes a month, about 8 percent of Airbus¡¯s global output of single-aisle planes.
Airbus has also recently hinted at the possibility of setting up a second overseas assembly line in the United States. EADS¡¯s helicopter division, Eurocopter, recently started building a plant in Mexico. Work on the A350 will be shared with partners in China, Russia and South Korea.
The rationale, in large part, has been to distribute more of the production costs for EADS products, which are priced in dollars, outside the euro zone and reduce the group¡¯s exposure to fluctuations in the foreign-exchange rate. But despite the business logic, it is a trend that does not always sit well in Europe, particularly in France, Mr. Gallois¡¯s home country, where nearly one in four people say they consider globalization to be a long-term threat to employment, according to opinion polls.
Mr. Gallois says he does not see it as a zero-sum game, however, and part of his new role as ambassador for industry will be trying to persuade European political and labor leaders that globalization and the revival of European industry can go hand in hand.
¡°If we want to get access to new markets, we need to also extend our footprint outside Europe,¡± he said. ¡°When we widen our access to the Chinese market, it¡¯s good for Europe. I don¡¯t see any contradiction.¡±
He said he did see an obligation, however, for the public and private sectors to invest more in technology research and in promoting education in engineering and science to ensure a sufficient pool of highly skilled workers. He also said he saw a need for leading manufacturers in France and elsewhere to nurture the smaller companies at home that supply them with precision components and expertise that remains scarce in emerging markets.
¡°We have in France a significant number of global industrial groups that are maybe not investing too much in France but who have headquarters, research activities in France and a supply chain in France,¡± Mr. Gallois said.
¡°I think these big groups have a special responsibility to support the networks around them in France ¡ª and the same goes for the rest of Europe,¡± he continued. ¡°This is what German companies are doing, and in other countries they are also starting to recognize it.¡±
