PARIS ¡ª PARIS To a visitor from Mars, France¡¯s presidential election must seem like a bizarre contest between candidates waging largely artificial battles with Europe before an electorate of economic illiterates.
President Nicolas Sarkozy boasts of having saved and turning the corner in the common currency area¡¯s (with a little help from the German chancellor, Angela Merkel) despite having lost France¡¯s top-grade credit rating.
Mr. Sarkozy won plaudits for his activist handling of the E.U. presidency in 2008 when he led the Union¡¯s response to the global financial crisis and mediated an end to a brief war between Russia and Georgia.
But the conservative leader has just whipped up two conflicts with Brussels, over border controls and trade, in an apparent bid to claw back voters from the far-right, anti- candidate Marine Le Pen, who advocates leaving the euro.
In what would be breaches of European treaties, Mr. Sarkozy threatened last week to pull France out of the Schengen zone of passport-free travel in Europe and to erect unilateral trade barriers unless he got his way on stricter controls on migrants and on unfair competition in public procurement.
In reality, negotiations to overhaul the Schengen system are already well advanced, and the European Commission is working on proposals to require greater reciprocity in access to public bids. So Mr. Sarkozy can reap the electoral benefits of sounding tough without much risk of having to carry out his threats.
His main challenger, Fran?ois Hollande, the Socialist candidate, has vowed not to ratify a treaty on tougher budget discipline signed by 25 European states unless Germany and other partners agree to add measures to promote growth and jobs.
¡°It¡¯s a strange campaign when some want to renegotiate a treaty that has already been signed while others want to leave treaties that are already in force,¡± said a senior E.U. official, who wished to remain anonymous, on the French electioneering.
While Mr. Sarkozy is demanding a U.S.-style ¡°Buy European¡± law, the Socialist program calls for a form of European , with extra tariffs on imports from countries that do not meet E.U. safety, labor and environmental standards.
Advisers to both camps say the candidates have sharpened their tone to appeal to the majority of voters who rejected the Union¡¯s constitutional treaty in a 2005 referendum. Many of those voters are leaning toward Ms. Le Pen or the hard-left firebrand Jean-Luc M¨¦lenchon.
The French attitude to Europe is riddled with paradoxes. The French see themselves as founders and leaders of the European project, yet many dislike the free trade, unfettered competition and open borders the Union enshrines.
Many also remain uncomfortable with the Union¡¯s eastward enlargement over the past decade, which they believe has diluted French influence and undermined their generous but expensive social model through cheap competition.
Mr. Sarkozy has laced recent speeches with swipes at ¡°Brussels technocrats and tribunals,¡± insisting that national governments be in charge of running Europe¡¯s economic and immigration policies.
While Mr. Hollande comes from the pro-European wing of the Socialist Party and is close to Jacques Delors, the former European Commission president, he has also stepped up talk of defending French interests and parliamentary sovereignty.
¡°I have decided to change the direction of Europe,¡± he said at a meeting with European center-left leaders including the German Social Democratic Party chairman, Sigmar Gabriel, during the past weekend.
Pledging to renegotiate the fiscal compact pushed through by the conservative chancellor, Ms. Merkel, Mr. Hollande said: ¡°This treaty is an illusion and it poses a risk.¡± Saying that the treaty created ¡°the conditions for lasting economic crisis,¡± he insisted it would only reproduce budgetary imbalances.
He also urged widening the European Central Bank¡¯s mandate to include promoting growth ¡ª a nonstarter for Germany ¡ª and favors common European bonds to finance investment in the sectors of energy, education and urban development.
Senior European officials say that the treaty cannot be reopened and that the most Mr. Hollande can realistically expect is a separate E.U. action plan to promote growth and jobs.
