WASHINGTON (Reuters) ¡ª The nation¡¯s economy kept growing moderately in the late winter months, but rising energy prices were beginning to worry manufacturers and retailers across the country, the said Wednesday.
¡°Reports from the 12 Federal Reserve districts indicated that the economy continued to expand at a modest to moderate pace from mid-February through late March,¡± the of economic activity.
Positive signs included stronger manufacturing activity, steady hiring and improved retail business in much of the country, the Fed said. But overlying that was a sense of concern that costlier energy and rising gasoline prices were a threat.
¡°While the near-term outlook for household spending was encouraging, contacts in several districts expressed concerns that rising gas prices could limit discretionary spending in the months to come,¡± it added.
The report, based on data collected before April 2, comes from business contacts in each of the 12 districts that have regional Federal Reserve banks.
Its description of growth at a ¡°modest to moderate pace¡± was unchanged from the summary issued at the end of February. But coming after last week¡¯s government report showing only 120,000 jobs created in March, the fewest since October, it sounded a bit more upbeat about the job market.
¡°Hiring was steady or showed a modest increase across many districts,¡± the Fed¡¯s beige book said. ¡°Difficulty finding qualified workers, especially for high-skilled positions, was frequently reported.¡±
Fed policy makers will use the information to assess the economy when they meet April 23 and 24 to consider whether to make adjustments in their monetary policy.
The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Dennis P. Lockhart, a voting member of the policy-setting Federal Open Market Committee, said Wednesday that he would be ¡°somewhat reticent to consider another round of ¡± at this time.
The beige book¡¯s caution about rising energy prices seemed to be borne out in separate Labor Department data showing that imported petroleum costs were still on the rise. March import prices climbed by the most in nearly a year on sharply higher petroleum costs, the department said. Imported petroleum prices alone increased 4.3 percent, the biggest gain since April 2011.
Those increases helped drive overall import prices up 1.3 percent for the biggest monthly gain since April 2011, the Labor Department said.
Economists polled by Reuters had expected import prices to rise 0.8 percent last month. February¡¯s data was revised to show a 0.1 percent decline instead of the previously reported 0.4 percent increase.
The data underscores the size of the price shock Americans feel when they refuel their cars.
There are ample signs that higher gasoline prices are weighing on the nation¡¯s economy, still burdened by high unemployment and a soft housing sector after the 2007-9 .
Applications for home mortgages fell last week despite a drop in the average interest rate for 30-year mortgages, the Mortgage Bankers Association said in a separate report on Wednesday.
The Labor Department report showed that export prices rose 0.8 percent last month, above analysts¡¯ expectations for a 0.4 percent gain. Export prices increased 0.4 percent in February.
The Labor Department is scheduled to release data on Thursday that is expected to show tame price pressures at a wholesale level. Economists estimate that producer prices, excluding those from the volatile food and energy sector, rose 0.2 percent in March.
