Novak Djokovic has firsthand knowledge of the transformative power of the Davis Cup. He attributes his rise to the summit of men¡¯s tennis in part to all the good vibrations he absorbed as he led his long-struggling nation, Serbia, to its first Cup title in 2010.
So it would be intriguing to know exactly what Djokovic was thinking behind his sunglasses Sunday as he sat next to his girlfriend, Jelena Ristic, in the stands at the Monte Carlo Country Club and watched John Isner produce his latest bravura performance under big pressure.
Though the Serbian team would have much preferred that Djokovic be with them in Prague, watching Isner required no major effort on Djokovic¡¯s part. Like many a tennis star past and present, his primary residence is in Monte Carlo, and he often trains at the club where Isner and the enduring ¡ª and formidable ¡ª doubles team of Bob and Mike Bryan gave the United States a surprisingly straightforward victory over France and an unexpected spot in the Davis Cup semifinals.
¡°We¡¯ve had the worst draw that you could possibly imagine so far,¡± said Jim Courier, the U.S. captain. ¡°I¡¯m shocked we¡¯re still in the Davis Cup this year.¡±
Serbia, with Djokovic out of the lineup to conserve his energy for the major individual events ahead, is no longer in the Davis Cup this year. But with Isner, a tower of a man filling tall orders, the United States has beaten Switzerland and France on the road and on clay. It should not get any easier from here because the semifinals in September will be back on the road in Spain, in all likelihood on more red clay. If Courier and the Americans somehow survive that, the final would likely be on yet more clay in Argentina, which will be a favorite in its home semifinal against Tomas Berdych and the Czechs.
Reading too much into the semifinals at this stage is foolhardy, considering how weary and/or injured the top players could be after a four-month surge that will include the , Wimbledon, the Olympics and the .
David Ferrer is a stunning 14-0 in Davis Cup singles play on Spanish clay. And though he has already committed to the semifinal, will he truly make it to the court? And will Rafael Nadal return to the team under a new captain, Alex Corretja?
¡°It¡¯s going to be a war of attrition for these players to have enough energy to be ready to go in September,¡± Courier said.
But Djokovic is well-placed to know that the transformative effects for now are well under way for Isner, who is back at No. 10 in the rankings this week. After upsetting Roger Federer in the victory over Switzerland in February, Isner upset Djokovic in the semifinals in Indian Wells, California. Now Isner has swept both of his singles matches on the road against France, overwhelming the solid defenses of Gilles Simon in straight sets Friday and manhandling an in-form, in-the-mood Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in four sets Sunday.
Isner, all 6-foot-9 of him, did not just do it with the massive, technically sound serve that has and will continue to define him to the general public. The 2.06-meter-tall American did it with a thunderous forehand, an unexpectedly solid backhand, deft and deftly timed drop shots and with often excellent volleys of the swing, reflex and lunging varietals. Perhaps more ominously for men like Djokovic, he did it with an equanimity that indicated that he fully expected to do it.
¡°I think the reason I played so well this weekend was because beating Roger in the first round was huge for me,¡± Isner said. ¡°Prior to that, to be honest, I hadn¡¯t really played that great in Davis Cup.¡±
It was a good Sunday for University of Georgia alumni with unconventional backgrounds. Bubba Watson, who has never had a formal golf lesson, won the Masters. Isner ¡ª who, unlike Watson, kept the tears to a minimum ¡ª is the only college graduate in the top 30.
Patrick McEnroe, the former U.S. captain, thinks Isner is playing well enough on clay to reach the French Open final this year. That would be quite a leap for a 26-year-old who has made just one Grand Slam quarterfinal appearance and has yet to prove that he can handle the physical rigors of seven matches over two weeks as well as he handled the longest match in tennis history in the first round at Wimbledon in 2010 against Nicolas Mahut.
But American excitement is understandable, and it is not only the Americans who are impressed. ¡°It was bothering me to see how much I was admiring him,¡± Guy Forget, the French captain, told French reporters. ¡°Every time John had his back against the wall, he came up with a fabulous shot.¡±
As a result, Forget did not get his happy ending in his 14th and final year as French captain. The best came early with France winning its only title under his leadership in 2001. But the team did reach two other finals during his tenure, and Forget did succeed in maintaining the Davis Cup¡¯s status as a main event in France, which is not the case in the United States, where Americans often scratch their heads over the staggered schedule or ignore the event altogether in favor of myriad other sports diversions.
If, however, Isner and his teammates keep this particular run going, their compatriots might want to consider shifting their priorities and paying attention for a change.
Djokovic is already watching closely ¡ª and in person.
