NEW ORLEANS ¡ª Kentucky Coach finally found the right team and the right setting to outrace his tortured tournament history. For all the drama, all the investigations and all the late-season heartbreak Calipari has endured, the game that delivered him his first national title came against a program nearly as iconic as his own and in almost anticlimactic fashion.
With the Kentucky star Anthony Davis dominating the game defensively, Kentucky built an 18-point first-half lead over Kansas on Monday night and held on for in the national championship game at the Superdome.
Davis, the consensus national player of the year, . A 6-foot-10 forward seemingly destined to be the No. 1 pick in the , Davis scored only 6 points but blocked shots, intimidated shooters and rebounded with an otherworldly intensity that provided the night¡¯s defining images.
Davis was named the Final Four¡¯s most outstanding player after finishing with 16 rebounds, 6 blocks, 5 assists and 3 steals. For all of the tradition and passion that is tied to Kentucky¡¯s eighth national title, the championship is nearly as notable for being the long-awaited first for Calipari, the Wildcats¡¯ polarizing coach.
Unapologetic about recruiting players who toe-touch campus for one season, this Kentucky Final Four was as much a validation for Calipari and his turnstile recruiting methods as his team¡¯s march to the championship game. But in the postgame news conference, Calipari looked more exhausted and irritated than excited, saying he was looking forward to going home and going to bed.
¡°I don¡¯t feel any different,¡± Calipari said. ¡°I¡¯m not going to feel any different in the morning. I¡¯m going to go to Mass in the morning and be the same guy.¡±
And on this night, clearly having more talent than Bill Self¡¯s Kansas team (32-7), Calipari¡¯s squad was barely tested. The Wildcats finished a dominant season at 38-2, and Calipari exacted revenge on Self, who had beaten him in the 2008 final while Calipari was at Memphis.
For a few fleeting moments, it appeared that the ghosts of Calipari¡¯s tournament pasts could return. Kansas cut the lead to 5 points with 1 minute 37 seconds remaining, and it appeared destined to cut that to 4 points after a Davis free throw when Tyshawn Taylor found himself wide open on a backdoor cut off an inbounds play.
But the Kentucky freshman Michael Kidd-Gilchrist closed with astonishing speed and gave the game the closest thing it will get to a hallmark play. Taylor tried a reverse layup and Kidd-Gilchrist¡¯s sublime effort led him to a clean block and a clinched ballgame.
¡°He made an unbelievable play,¡± Taylor said of Kidd-Gilchrist. ¡°I definitely thought that I had a layup.¡±
The Kentucky sophomore Doron Lamb led all scorers with 22 points. Marquis Teague added 14 points, and Kidd-Gilchrist had 11.
With six McDonald¡¯s all-Americans and as many as six candidates to be drafted in this year¡¯s N.B.A. draft, Kentucky showcased the dominance that had been its hallmark all season. The Wildcats played stingy defense, fought relentlessly for loose balls and looked like a disciplined and unselfish team.
So Davis certainly did not care that his first field goal did not come until the 5:14 mark of the second half when he hit a 17-foot baseline jumper. It was his only basket in 10 attempts, but his fingerprints were all over nearly every other aspect of the game.
¡°He is an unbelievable factor on both ends, certainly on defense,¡± Self said. ¡°His first jump is unbelievable. He¡¯s a very smart defender as well.¡±
Kentucky, with freshmen and sophomores leading the Wildcats to the No. 1 ranking for most of the season, was a decisive favorite Monday. That gave Calipari an excellent chance to stare down his N.C.A.A. tournament demons.
A demoralizing N.C.A.A. tournament loss came in the Round of 8, when his team was led by future N.B.A. standouts like John Wall and DeMarcus Cousins. Calipari¡¯s Wildcats never properly adjusted to a 1-3-1 zone, shooting 4 of 32 from 3-point range.
In 2008, Calipari¡¯s Memphis team squandered a 9-point lead in the final 2 minutes 12 seconds because of poor free-throw shooting and an inability to foul late that allowed in the final seconds to force overtime.
Calipari¡¯s tournament troubles go beyond the court. Two of his Final Fours ¡ª one at Massachusetts in 1996 and the other at Memphis in 2008 ¡ª were vacated for rules violations under his watch. (Calipari has not been directly implicated in either case.)
While Calipari¡¯s reputation may be questioned because of the violations, his ability to recruit is beyond dispute. But he seemed more exhausted than reflective Monday.
¡°It¡¯s not about me,¡± Calipari said. ¡°It¡¯s about these 13 players.¡±
On Monday night, it started with Davis, who dominated the first half even though he missed all four of his shots and did not score. Kentucky led by as many as 18 before entering halftime in front, 41-27. In the Wildcats¡¯ student section, there was a sign that read, ¡°Couches Burning Soon¡± ¡ª in a dual salute to the game¡¯s broadcaster, CBS, and to the celebrations in Kentucky after the Wildcats beat Louisville on Saturday in the semifinals.
In the first half, Davis grabbed nine rebounds and blocked three shots. More important, the specter of his condorlike wingspan on defense was engrained in Kansas¡¯ psyche. The three blocks did not do justice to the amount that Davis altered, as it seemed every Kansas offensive movement was made with him in mind. Davis guarded the offensively challenged center Jeff Withey most of the night, leaving him free to help on Robinson.
The driving Jayhawks guards short-armed shots to try to sneak the ball over him. Post players like Robinson, whom Davis dominated from the help side, shot the ball too hard and too quick to try to get it to the rim before he arrived, and made only 3 of 11 attempts in the first half.
¡°They did it with defense,¡± Calipari said. ¡°Unbelievable defensive effort.¡±
And while he insisted he did not care, Calipari finally fought off his coaching demons and claimed a national title.
