PHILADELPHIA ¡ª Any lingering doubt might have had about playing with a fractured right pinkie vanished after one pitch Saturday. pitcher Vance Worley threw a 90 mile-an-hour belt-high fastball that Wright crushed to the deepest part of the ballpark, beyond the marker on the center-field fence that indicates 409 feet.
With one swing, Wright validated his claim that he was ready to play after missing three games, continued his scorching start to the season and gave the a 1-0 lead in their eventual 5-0 win over the Phillies.
¡°It was good for the confidence, good for the psyche to go out and do well your first at-bat back,¡± Wright said. ¡°It kind of puts that doubt in the back of your mind, that you can go out there and feel pretty good and healthy.¡±
As recently as Friday, the injury was believed to be severe enough to send Wright to the disabled list. On Saturday morning, Wright deemed himself ready to play. His presence was the most surprising and important part of the Mets¡¯ sixth win in eight games. The Mets¡¯ 6-2 start to the season is their best since they went 7-1 in 2006. They won 97 games that season, the last year they reached the postseason.
Wright was a part of that team, which entered that season with far more than hype than this year¡¯s edition. But the Mets opened this season by going 4-0 with Wright in the lineup before dropping two of three games without him. As the franchise¡¯s marquee player, Wright is the team¡¯s biggest draw and a central figure in their batting order.
If Wright had to go on the disabled list, it would have been a blow to a player who missed 60 games last year after playing at least 144 games in the previous six seasons. Instead, Wright finished 3 for 5, raised his batting average to .588 and showed no ill effects from the injury.
¡°That¡¯s why he¡¯s a star,¡± Manager Terry Collins said.
Jon Niese was the other star of the game for the Mets. He did not allow a run in six and two-thirds innings, struck out five and did not permit a single Phillie to reach third base.
In his first start, Niese took a no-hitter into the seventh inning but left the game after surrendering four runs, three earned. On Saturday, he escaped the seventh unscathed with some help from Bobby Parnell, who recorded the final out of the inning.
¡°I thought the ball was coming out of my hand a lot better than the first game, despite the no hits through the first six innings,¡± Niese said. ¡°I felt I was able to focus in the later innings to get outs.¡±
Niese¡¯s performance, however, was overshadowed by Wright¡¯s return. Collins watched Wright in the batting cage before the game and in batting practice to make sure he did not release the bat from his hands too early. He did not check on Wright during the game, figuring that Wright would disclose any discomfort. Besides swinging the bat with his injured hand, he also made four throws from third base on defense.
Wright showed major progress in recovering from his injury Friday night, when he was able to grip a bat well enough to swing in the batting cage. He did so again Saturday morning and reported that he felt better.
Wright benefited from working with a hand specialist, learning exercises to avoid stiffness. The strength and conditioning coach Brad Andress played offensive line at Penn State and became used to dealing with jammed fingers, so he showed Wright different techniques to keep his pinkie flexible.
Wright expected swelling and stiffness after the game and committed to icing and monitoring the finger. Wright has pledged to slide feet first to avoid further injury; he hurt his hand sliding head first back into first base. He will wear a splint away from the ballpark and had his hand wrapped minutes after the game.
Even if Wright had finished 0 for 4, Collins said he would have considered Wright¡¯s return beneficial. Collins¡¯s rationale was that the other players ¡°don¡¯t hurt as bad¡± when they see the team¡¯s star playing with a broken finger.
¡°The face of this team, the face of this organization is going out there playing with a broken finger, the hamstrings may not be as tight,¡± Collins said before the game. ¡°If you¡¯re a guy on this team, and you¡¯re saying the star of the team is playing with a broken finger, I certainly got a sore shoulder. Throw some aspirin down, and let¡¯s go.¡±
But Wright was more than toughing out an injury Saturday. He helped his club remain unbeaten in games in which he has played. Though Wright¡¯s pinkie will not be fully healed for another few weeks, it was functional enough to allow him to hit a deep home run ¡ª and carefully accept congratulatory high fives from his teammates.
INSIDE PITCH
Right fielder Lucas Duda ended a 0-for-15 streak with a two-run homer in the fourth inning. Duda also doubled in the sixth.
