SUNRISE, Fla. (AP) ¡ª Martin Brodeur¡¯s teammates came out flying. He took care of everything else.
Brodeur stopped 24 shots for his 100th postseason win, and a three-goal first period was enough to help the spoil the ¡¯ long-awaited return to the playoffs in a 3-2 victory Friday night.
, Dainius Zubrus and Ryan Carter scored in a span of 8 minutes 25 seconds amid a 26-shot flurry in the opening period for the Devils, while Brodeur became just the second goalie in N.H.L. history to reach triple figures in playoff wins. Only Patrick Roy has more, with 151.
¡°Two milestones ¡ª my first and his 100th,¡± said Devils Coach Pete DeBoer, who spent the past three seasons on Florida¡¯s bench, unable to end the Panthers¡¯ playoff drought. ¡°It¡¯s a lot of wins. He¡¯s our backbone. He¡¯s the best ever. It¡¯s a great accomplishment.¡±
Brodeur also picked up an assist for his 10th postseason point. He swept Florida out of its last playoff appearance in 2000, and thwarted the Panthers again in Game 1.
¡°Big numbers, I think, are nice to get to,¡± Brodeur said. ¡°I think people always look at 50, 100, whatever, when you start talking wins to be the numbers to reach. Especially with only one goalie to have done it in the past with Patrick, it¡¯s kind of nice to be in the 100s¡±
Sean Bergenheim and Kris Versteeg scored for Florida, which was in its first postseason game since losing to Brodeur and the Devils on April 20, 2000. Jose Theodore made 35 saves for the Panthers, who got two assists from Mikael Samuelsson.
Game 2 is Sunday night.
¡°As a group, we¡¯ve definitely got to tighten up and be aware of their skill out there,¡± Panthers defenseman Ed Jovanovski said. ¡°But we can take a lot of good out of that game and try to implement it out of Game 2.¡±
By the time the game was barely six minutes old, the Devils had already taken 12 shots on Theodore, who came up big time and again in the early moments.
No matter. The breakthrough came soon enough.
Elias got the puck in the right-wing circle, deked twice as Theodore flailed about before eventually winding up seated on the ice ¡ª and helpless as the shot eventually sailed by for the game¡¯s opening goal.
A double-minor against Florida¡¯s Shawn Matthias for high-sticking came at 10:18, and the Devils kept up the attack.
And with just eight seconds left in that power play, Zubrus was rewarded, getting alone in front of Theodore to make it 2-0.
Less than a minute later, Carter ¡ª who spent seven games with Florida this season before being waived on Oct. 25 ¡ª picked up the puck after a turnover, skated in and beat Theodore low to the glove side for a 3-0 lead that left a building that had been so loud a few minutes earlier in disbelief.
¡°I was just trying to give my team a chance to win and make every save,¡± Theodore said. ¡°But they kept coming pretty hard.¡±
