Every March for the last several seasons, Dwane Casey has looked from his perch as an N.B.A. coach to see how the N.C.A.A. tournament is treating his Kentucky Wildcats. After all these years, Casey¡¯s heart still bleeds Kentucky blue.
¡°I¡¯m happy for the fans, I¡¯m happy for the program,¡± said Casey, a Kentucky native who is the ¡¯ coach. ¡°I get excited for the school and for the tradition.¡±
He was a month shy of his ninth birthday on March 19, 1966, when Adolph Rupp¡¯s all-white Kentucky team lost in the N.C.A.A. championship game to a Texas Western team that started five black players. Twelve years later, Casey was the captain of Joe B. Hall¡¯s Kentucky team that won its own national title.
Casey was a bench player at Kentucky, the quintessential coach in waiting. At the end of Casey¡¯s playing career, Hall suggested that Casey, who earned a degree in business administration, get into the coaching business. That began a journey that continues to this day.
He spent a season with Hall, then five years at Western Kentucky with Clem Haskins. He joined Eddie Sutton¡¯s staff at Kentucky in 1985 and became Sutton¡¯s top recruiter.
¡°Deep down, I¡¯m really proud of my school,¡± Casey said. ¡°I pull for it ¡ª and the other stuff, I try not to dwell on and I move forward with it.¡±
He may not dwell on it, but the other stuff turned Casey¡¯s coaching career upside down. It is a part of his life ¡ª and a part of March Madness that should not be ignored.
In 1988, Casey¡¯s promising college coaching career was derailed when he was implicated in a recruiting scandal. The N.C.A.A. said that Casey had sent a recruit $1,000 in an express-mail envelope that mysteriously opened.
Sutton resigned. Then Casey resigned, too, and the N.C.A.A. issued an order effectively barring him from college coaching for five years. Casey has always maintained his innocence and filed a $7 million lawsuit against the express-mail company and its employees. Casey settled the lawsuit, and the N.C.A.A. rescinded the show-cause order that kept him from coaching, but he has never come close to returning to the college ranks.
Sutton bounced back quickly. After sitting out a season, he was hired at Oklahoma State, where he coached more than 500 games with great success.
Casey¡¯s experience mirrors that of numerous assistants at other programs that got in trouble. When Louisville was placed on probation in the 1990s, Coach Denny Crum was unscathed, but two assistants resigned. Last year at Connecticut, two members of the staff were fired for their roles in a recruiting scandal; Coach Jim Calhoun received a three-game suspension.
There are times when an assistant who makes a mistake has been given a second chance.
In 1989, when Rick Pitino went to interview at Kentucky to replace Sutton, he was greeted in Lexington by reporters and a front-page article in The Herald-Leader detailing recruiting violations during his first coaching job, as an assistant at Hawaii, that were cited in a 1977 N.C.A.A. report. The report implicated Pitino in 8 of the 64 violations that led to Hawaii¡¯s being placed on two years¡¯ probation, including arranging airfare, used cars and free food for players, and it said that he and Coach Bruce O¡¯Neil had misinformed N.C.A.A. officials.
The N.C.A.A. committee on infractions recommended that Pitino and O¡¯Neil be disassociated from Hawaii athletics. But Pitino landed on his feet. He had already been an assistant under Jim Boeheim at Syracuse and was on his way to head-coaching jobs at Boston University and at Providence.
Asked about the report that afternoon in Lexington, Pitino, who was the Knicks¡¯ coach at the time, said: ¡°The Hawaii problem was no problem at all because I¡¯ve already been at Providence and Boston University. I¡¯m not an assistant fighting for my first job. It¡¯s no problem for me ¡ª in fact, I think it¡¯s a positive because I know exactly what can go on the wrong way.¡±
