After the first two races of the season, fans are getting used to these two images: on Saturday, the smiling, celebratory face of Lewis Hamilton after scoring the pole position, and on Sunday after the race, a somewhat despondent Hamilton as third-place finisher while someone else celebrates victory.
It used to be that the man who scored pole position was almost certain to win the race. But as the series prepares for the Chinese Grand Prix outside Shanghai this weekend, the value of the pole and qualifying in general seem to have diminished as the fastest drivers on Saturday have rarely been those who finish the race in the top spots.
¡°I won¡¯t deny that I¡¯m disappointed to have had two pole positions and not to have been able to convert either of them into victories,¡± Hamilton said. ¡°But I prefer to think of it that luck just hasn¡¯t been on my side and that it will swing my way sooner or later.¡±
Those who do not talk about luck are the engineers building and setting up the cars, and this year there is a pressing technical issue that has to do with the best use of the tires during the race. Some teams manage to make their cars fastest for a few laps in qualifying but have failed to find the same speed during the many laps of the race.
Since new technical rules have facilitated overtaking and more frequent pit stops to change tires, a driver¡¯s starting position has become less important because he can now pass several cars during a race instead of expecting his starting position to be the ending position.
As a result, engineers think less about what compromises to make to favor qualifying. Several teams, like Mercedes, have found their cars very fast in qualifying and slower during the race without having aimed for that.
¡°Nothing has been consciously done to focus on making the car quick in qualifying and not so good in the race,¡± said Ross Brawn, the director of the Mercedes team. ¡°Because under the current rules ¡ª with D.R.S.,¡± a reference to a moveable rear wing, ¡°and the number of pit stops ¡ª there are no real rewards for doing so¡±
Few aspects of the series over the past couple of decades have been as difficult to regulate as qualifying. After going through several different formulas for creating competition ¡ª and a great show ¡ª in setting up grid positions, Formula One came up with its current three-heat elimination style of one-hour qualifying in 2006 and the Saturday qualifying session became for many spectators the most exciting part of the weekend.
It remains the time when the drivers and teams get to show off who has the fastest car on a single lap. There is also a different mental approach for qualifying, and some drivers have excelled at qualifying and been less adept at racing.
Although Michael Schumacher holds the record of 68 career pole positions, that achievement seems less impressive than that of the man who comes in second in the record books: Ayrton Senna.
Senna had 65 pole positions in 161 races of his career, for an average of 40 percent, compared with 288 races for Schumacher and a rate of 23.6 percent. Senna is remembered particularly for his qualifying at the in 1988, when he claimed to have risen to a different level of consciousness while wiping out all other competitors with his superior speed on the dangerous, narrow street circuit.
¡°I was already on pole and I was going faster and faster,¡± Senna said to Gerald Donaldson, a Formula One writer. ¡°One lap after the other, quicker and quicker and quicker. I was at one stage just on pole, then by half a second, and then one second ¡ª and I kept going. Suddenly, I was nearly two seconds faster than anybody else, including my teammate with the same car. And I suddenly realized that I was no longer driving the car consciously.
¡°I was kind of driving it by instinct, only I was in a different dimension,¡± he said. ¡°I was way over the limit, but still able to find even more.¡±
Considering all effort that goes into scoring the pole position, the one area that drivers could complain about ¡ª but don¡¯t ¡ª is that no points are awarded for the pole position in Formula One qualifying unlike in some other series, including the GP2 series, a step below Formula One. It is supposed to be its own reward in giving the driver the advantage of starting first on the grid.
