For the second time this season, Daniel Alfredsson of the Senators was unable to finish a game at Madison Square Garden, apparently because of a head injury. But Alfredsson¡¯s teammates rallied around their captain for Ottawa¡¯s 3-2 overtime victory over the in Game 2 of the first-round series.
¡°We talked about it a lot in the room after the second period,¡± Senators forward Zack Smith said after Chris Neil scored 1 minute 17 seconds into overtime for the win. ¡°We really wanted to win the game for him.¡±
Alfredsson absorbed a blow to the head from the Rangers rookie forward Carl Hagelin at 10:32 of the second period. Accompanied by an Ottawa trainer, Alfredsson left the ice immediately after the incident and never returned.
The Senators announced during the third period that Alfredsson, 39, would not return to the game but did not provide any further details after the game. Before the series, Alfredsson acknowledged that these could be the final playoffs of his 16-year N.H.L. career.
¡°I don¡¯t know how severe the injury is, but it¡¯s a big loss,¡± Ottawa center Jason Spezza said. ¡°You don¡¯t replace a player like Alfie. But these are the playoffs, so you have to be ready for anything.¡±
For the hit on his fellow Swede, Hagelin was given a five-minute penalty for elbowing and could be subject to supplementary discipline. Hagelin, 23, has yet to acquire a history of infractions in his young N.H.L. career. A hearing is scheduled for Sunday afternoon with Brendan Shanahan, the N.H.L.¡¯s vice president for hockey operations.
¡°I¡¯ll let Brendan see what he thinks about it,¡± Senators Coach Paul MacLean said of Hagelin¡¯s hit.
Hagelin said that he was trying ¡°to finish my check¡± and was not sure if he hit Alfredsson high.
Rangers Coach John Tortorella also defended Hagelin¡¯s actions as those of a player looking to finish his check and said that if Hagelin was suspended, then Ottawa defenseman Chris Phillips should receive similar discipline for an elbow he landed to the head of Ryan Callahan during the first period.
After Alfredsson was hit, the Senators scored on the subsequent power play when defenseman Erik Karlsson¡¯s shot toward the Rangers goal was accidentally deflected past Henrik Lundqvist by Michael Del Zotto to tie the score, 1-1, at 13:50 of the second period.
Alfredsson sustained a concussion in Ottawa¡¯s victory against the Rangers on Oct. 29 when he was hit by Wojtek Wolski. The next week, Alfredsson said he was experiencing discomfort while playing with his children, but he returned to the lineup after missing only five games. It was the first concussion of Alfredsson¡¯s career.
¡°Alfie is the heart and soul of our franchise and has been for a long time,¡± Smith said. ¡°You never want to lose your leader, a guy who¡¯s one of our best players, on a hit as suspect as that.¡±
Said Neil: ¡°It was an emotional game, a very physical game, and the key is to do your best to keep your emotions in check. I thought we did a great job of staying in the game and tying it up late.¡±
Zenon Konopka, added to the lineup with Matt Carkner in a move by MacLean to bolster the Senators¡¯ toughness, said the best response to Alfredsson¡¯s injury was to continue to play physically and beat the Rangers on the scoreboard. The Senators came back from a 2-1 deficit early in the third period to send the series to Ottawa tied at a game apiece.
¡°We¡¯re a family,¡± Konopka said. ¡°No one¡¯s going to be taken advantage of.¡±
