Less than two hours before they were to play the Philadelphia Flyers at Madison Square Garden, the could not find . They called his cellphone, but it had been turned off. They called his wife, Therese, who said he had left their Midtown apartment.
On game days, Lundqvist follows an elaborate set of rituals, refined over his years playing in the N.H.L. and in his native Sweden. He knows precisely when he must wake from his nap, when he must eat and when he must arrive at the rink. He listens to the same music, heavy on punk rock, as he tapes his sticks and stretches his limbs. He checks, then double-checks his equipment: his skates, his pads, his gloves. He sits in his stall. He does not talk.
For Lundqvist, to feel unprepared is to feel uncomfortable ¡ª and for a goalie, nothing is worse than feeling uncomfortable.
He entered the locker room as the pregame meeting was about to end. He walked in feeling calm and relaxed. Then he realized that he had miscalculated by an hour. He had only 45 minutes until warm-ups. He did not feel comfortable anymore.
Coach John Tortorella asked Lundqvist if he was ready. Lundqvist said he was. You better be, Tortorella told him.
Late in the first period, Lundqvist stuffed Scott Hartnell . He faced 29 shots in all. He stopped all of them as the .
On that day, Nov. 26, early in what has been his finest season, Lundqvist was ready. His family, friends and teammates say that he has, in fact, been preparing for this season since he was a boy, when, on the way to games, his father would ask him to visualize positive outcomes.
¡°He wants to be the best, so he¡¯s the best,¡± the Rangers¡¯ backup goalie Martin Biron said. ¡°If all you have is one day, one game, one shot, he can do it.¡±
After Saturday night¡¯s 4-1 loss to the Washington Captials in the regular-season finale, Lundqvist, a leading candidate to win the Vezina Trophy, awarded annually to the league¡¯s top goaltender, has posted a .930 save percentage, a 1.97 goals-against, a career-high 39 victories and 8 shutouts for the Rangers, who have earned the top seed in the Eastern Conference for the first time since winning the Stanley Cup in 1994.
The Rangers crave more, as does Lundqvist, owner of Olympic gold but foiled thus far in his quest for Stanley Cup silver.
¡°He feels that he¡¯s been here long enough,¡± center Brandon Dubinsky said. ¡°I don¡¯t want to put words in his mouth, but we haven¡¯t accomplished anything here, and he wants to accomplish something here. That¡¯s important to him. That drives him every day.¡±
That emptiness drove Lundqvist last summer, when he lost 13 pounds, skated more (with new, more efficient skates), trained harder. The outcome has been a span of brilliance appreciated in hockey circles but overshadowed locally by Eli Manning and the -winning Giants, Jeremy Lin and now Tim Tebow.
Surrounded by his best supporting cast in seven seasons with the Rangers, Lundqvist has found balance, enjoying personal fulfillment with his professional success. He married last August. He turned 30 in March. His first child is due this summer.
It all can get a man thinking, and Lundqvist is a man who thinks. When emphasizing a point, he uses not his voice but his entire face. His head tilts forward. His eyes widen to pools of blue.
¡°The first three years, it was a lot about proving to everybody else that I should be here, that I should play in this league,¡± Lundqvist said in an interview last month at the team¡¯s practice facility in Greenburgh, N.Y. ¡°But now it¡¯s about proving to myself. I want to be good. I want to play better.¡±
The former Rangers goalie Mike Richter said Lundqvist¡¯s attitude reminded him of a sentiment expressed by Wayne Gretzky, who considered himself a far better player at 28 than he was at 23 because he was tougher and more mentally resilient.
¡°Your body diminishes over time, but goaltenders often get better as they get older,¡± said Richter, who led the Rangers to their 1994 title. ¡°You know yourself better. You know how to respond. That¡¯s the deal when the franchise is relying on you.¡±
If anything, the Rangers are guilty of depending on Lundqvist too much. In years past, he played so often ¡ª four straight seasons of at least 70 appearances, then 68 last season ¡ª that he was not as fresh during the playoffs. Though the Rangers have reached the playoffs every season except 2009-10 since Lundqvist arrived in 2005, they have not won a postseason series in four years.
¡°The clock is ticking,¡± said Lundqvist, who has played 62 games this season. ¡°You don¡¯t know how many more chances you¡¯re going to get.¡±

