always did the same thing with a bat in his hands. He choked up.
Whether he was hitting singles and stealing bases as a slender leadoff man or mashing monstrous homers as a bulky cleanup hitter, Bonds held his bat a few inches up on the handle.
It worked out nicely for him.
Bonds set a major league record with 762 home runs, had a career .298 average, drove in 1,996 runs and won 7 Most Valuable Player awards. He is perhaps the greatest hitter of his generation, though accusations of using performance-enhancing drugs tarnished his image.
Considering the incredible success Bonds had at the plate with Pittsburgh and San Francisco, it would seem other hitters would try to emulate his stance, his swing, his approach. But that is not the case. Look around the majors now, and fewer players choke up on the bat.
Smaller players put their hands all the way down on the knob and swing for the fences. Some sluggers even hold the bat with a finger off the handle because it gives them more whip. They forgo bat control and opt for more power, though choking up certainly did not affect Bonds¡¯s ability to go deep.
Dustin Pedroia and Jimmy Rollins won M.V.P. awards doing it their way. Both players hardly compare to Bonds in size ¡ª they are barely 5 feet 8 inches in spikes ¡ª yet they have put up big numbers without choking up.
¡°Barry¡¯s game was bat speed,¡± said Pedroia, the 2008 American League M.V.P. with Boston. ¡°Other guys want to have extension. I¡¯m sure they try it out in the cages, but they¡¯re just not comfortable with it. I think guys don¡¯t choke up because striking out has become acceptable since pitchers are so good now.¡±
Rollins, the 2007 National League M.V.P. with Philadelphia, never had a pronounced choke on the bat until moving up ever so slightly this season. Perhaps he noticed the hitter in front of him, Placido Polanco, and the one behind him, Hunter Pence, choke up.
¡°I started because Barry Bonds had always done it,¡± Pence said. ¡°I¡¯ve done it since I was 12. I don¡¯t feel comfortable on the bottom. Most guys think I¡¯m unorthodox. You have to hit the way you feel best. There¡¯s no one way to do it. Hitting is fluid.¡±
Polanco is a career .301 hitter and has always been one of the toughest batters to strike out. Choking up helps him put the ball in play and makes him a prototypical No. 2 hitter.
¡°I feel good doing it and I have more bat control,¡± Polanco said. ¡°I don¡¯t know why other guys don¡¯t do it.¡±
offered one explanation. ¡°I don¡¯t do it because my bat is not that big,¡± he said. Reyes added that if he choked up, his bat would be ¡°smaller, and I won¡¯t be able to reach the outside pitch.¡±
Hard to argue with Reyes, a four-time All-Star with the Mets before going to the Miami Marlins in the off-season. He led the N.L. with a .337 average last season.
But bat size is not an issue for Polanco, who also uses a 33.5-inch model. Bonds used a 34-inch bat and choked up an inch, giving him less reach than Reyes. Bonds compensated for his choking up by moving closer to the plate.
Hitting coaches do not stress choking up in the majors because most players are not open to making dramatic changes once they have reached the highest level.
¡°They have it ingrained in their head that they¡¯re quicker that way and they have more whip that way and they have more power,¡± said Greg Gross, the Phillies¡¯ hitting coach. ¡°I don¡¯t agree with it, but they don¡¯t do it.¡±
Gross played several seasons in Philadelphia with Mike Schmidt, a Hall of Fame third baseman who hit 548 career home runs. Schmidt often tinkered with his swing and stance and made situational adjustments, including choking up when he had to make contact to move runners along. There are not many players who think like Schmidt these days.
