When the 2012 season began at the Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne on March 18, it was hailed as a vintage year, with a record six former world champions racing each other for the first time in history.
Few people expected that the oldest of those champions, who was also the one who had scored his last title the longest ago ¡ª in 2004 ¡ª would quickly emerge as one of the strongest contenders.
But that was to underestimate , who at 43, has won more races (91) and titles (7) than any other driver in history. In fact, at every step of the way during the German¡¯s comeback to the sport two years ago at age 41 after three years in retirement, he has been written off as having made a failed return, and it has been suggested that he should retire for good.
Yet he qualified fourth in that first race this year, his best qualifying position since his return. His car broke down during the race, but he returned to qualify third in the second race, in Malaysia on March 25.
He finished only 10th in the Malaysia race. But the two surprise qualifying results showed that this most prodigious of workers and talented of drivers had truly returned and hinted that it was only a question of time before he won a race in his Mercedes.
It was a telling moment when, during the post-qualifying news conference in Malaysia where the top three qualifiers meet the media, Schumacher forgot which chair he was supposed to sit in. It had been nearly six years since he had taken part in that news conference.
¡°Naturally, you would rather be further forward than I am,¡± Schumacher said, ¡°but quite honestly, from where we have come, I think it¡¯s quite an achievement to be third, so I have no regrets, just feeling good about it.¡±
No driver has been so often in such news conferences, and the comeback of Schumacher, as one of the six world champions, could become the biggest story in the series this year.
During the first phase of his career, Schumacher broke most of the sport¡¯s records: In addition to the most pole positions, victories and titles, he also set records for the most consecutive victories, victories at the same team, at the same race, and many more.
He won his first world title in 1994 with the Benetton team, the year that Ayrton Senna crashed out and died in the third race of the season at Imola, Italy, with Schumacher pushing hard behind him. Schumacher had won the first two races, with Senna dropping out of both.
The German won his second title the following year, before making a surprise move to the Ferrari team in 1996, a team that had not won a drivers¡¯ title since 1979 with Jody Scheckter driving.
The same persistence, optimism and talent that would make Schumacher the champion five more times, from 2000 to 2004, while driving with Ferrari, is now giving him his second wind and the confidence to move ahead again. Schumacher has to prove that at nearly a generation older than most of the other champions, he can still be not just good enough to race in Formula One, but good enough to be No. 1.
In the two years since his return, he has been outraced, outqualified and outscored by his teammate, Nico Rosberg, who is 16 years his junior. Although Schumacher managed to do better than Rosberg in the first two races of the season, Rosberg has had some uncharacteristic bad luck.
But Schumacher¡¯s team has always stood up for him.
¡°Generally speaking Michael was good throughout last year and improving all the time,¡± said Norbert Haug, the head of Mercedes Motorsport. ¡°So he learned and understood more and more, and I have no doubt that he is absolutely capable and a great racer.¡±
Schumacher himself has visibly tired of answering questions about what brings him back, what motivates him and when he will start winning again. ¡°Right now, thinking about winning races is a bit optimistic,¡± he said. ¡°But it is obvious we have made good improvements.¡±
