Professional tennis is, at its core, a selfish pursuit, but Ivan Ljubicic, who is about to play his last tournament, has done his part to make it less so.
A war refugee who became a champion, he had major moments on his own: winning 10 tournaments and reaching No. 3 in the world rankings in 2006, the only year he ever truly felt he had a chance to win a singles title in the Grand Slam tournaments that have routinely thwarted him. That high-water year, he reached the quarterfinals of the Australian Open, made the semifinals of the and qualified for the elite, eight-man tour championship for the second season in a row.
But Ljubicic¡¯s biggest impact has been reserved for more collective matters: the bronze medal at the Olympics in doubles with Mario Ancic; the first Davis Cup title for Croatia in 2005 and the years of service to his dislocated family and to the men¡¯s tour. With his shaved head and imposing frame, Ljubicic could pass for a bouncer, but he is much more an activist than a pugilist at heart.
Ljubicic was on the A.T.P. player council before it was a celebrity magnet, and for an extraordinary period from July 2008 to February 2009 he even served on the tour¡¯s Board of Directors, a post no active player had held in nearly 20 years. He was also, for a stretch, one of the rare player-captains in Davis Cup.
¡°Ivan is a great family man, and is very bright,¡± said in an e-mail message. ¡°I always enjoyed his company on the council. He is a natural leader.¡±
Ljubicic, more than any other man, set the tone and example for much bigger stars: urging men like Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic to shelve their competitive concerns and become involved in the game¡¯s governance and their tour¡¯s particulars. Even with Nadal¡¯s recent frustrations and resignation from the player council, this is a significant development, and it could loom larger still if the unprecedented ongoing talks between these leading men at the peak of their mutual clout and the heads of the Grand Slam tournaments result in a greater percentage of revenue (and power) flowing to the players.
Rumblings about a possible strike continue, and it was no coincidence that the French Open announced Wednesday that prize money would increase about 7 percent this year, with much of that raise dedicated to the first three rounds. Clearly, the players, with Federer leading the way, are being taken seriously, even if their emphasis is on Grand Slam compensation in 2013 and beyond.
¡°They definitely have power, and more importantly they are smart guys,¡± Ljubicic said of the top three and Andy Murray. ¡°I¡¯m happy we finally have in some way the direct communication between the players and the Slams, which I strongly feel was missing basically forever.¡±
¡°We still have issues, and we always will have issues, because of the way our tour structure is,¡± he added. ¡°But I feel the players are much better represented now and the players are much more involved in politics and they want to know what¡¯s going on a lot more now than 10 years ago. I feel proud about that.¡±
Now, at 33, Ljubicic is about to enter his last week as a player: The Monte Carlo Masters, which begins Monday, will be his farewell tournament. Ljubicic has a young family, with a 3-year-old son, Leonardo, and a daughter, Sara, who was born in November. Though others will play on in their 30s, Ljubicic¡¯s body and soul are telling him ¡ª shouting at him ¡ª ¡°Enough.¡±
¡°When you realize that 80 or 90 percent of the time during a workout is actually dealing with pain and trying to get exercises that would limit the pain rather than make you better, then it¡¯s not really fun anymore,¡± Ljubicic said. ¡°Playing tennis matches is the easiest part of all. It¡¯s just getting ready and practicing and traveling obviously now with two kids. It¡¯s not easy. I don¡¯t want to travel by myself. So I just felt that¡¯s it. It¡¯s not worth it anymore.¡±
It has been a remarkable journey to that conclusion. It began at age 8 in his native city, Banja Luka, in what is today Bosnia and Herzegovina when his father told him it was time to pick a sport. Ljubicic, who had watched Wimbledon on television, picked tennis.
