There were no rings to distribute and no flag to be raised, but opening day at the Stadium otherwise could not have gone better for the . Beginning with Jorge Posada¡¯s ceremonial first pitch and ending with a strikeout by reliever Dave Robertson, it was a day to soothe pinstriped hearts after last season¡¯s bitter postseason elimination.
Hiroki Kuroda, signed in January to fortify the starting rotation, pitched masterly. He surrendered five singles in eight shutout innings and led the Yankees to a memorable victory against the on a glorious spring afternoon before a sellout crowd of 49,386.
Nick Swisher led the attack with a first-inning, bases-clearing double. Alex Rodriguez added three hits, including hit first home run of the season, tying Ken Griffey Jr. for fifth on the career list with 630 homers. Curtis Granderson, who hit a career-high 41 home runs last season, capped the scoring with a solo home run in the fifth.
But the biggest star of the day was Kuroda, who dominated the Angels with precise control and a mixture of deceptive late-moving pitches to keep batters off balance.
¡°He was brilliant today,¡± Manager Joe Girardi said.
According to the Elias Sports Bureau, Kuroda became the first Yankees starter to throw at least eight scoreless innings in a home opener since Rick Rhoden threw a shutout against the Minnesota Twins in 1988.
Kuroda walked two and struck out six. Among the five Angels hits three were ground-ball singles, including one from Albert Pujols, who went 1 for 4 with a strikeout. Erick Aybar had a bunt single in the third, and Peter Bourjos reached on a bloop single in the fifth. Only two Angels reached second, this from a team scored nine runs the previous day and 19 in three previous games.
¡°He kept the ball down and mixed his pitches when he needed to when he got in trouble,¡± Pujols said, ¡°which was not many times. He was keeping us off balance and he threw a great game.¡±
Kuroda set down 10 batters in a row from the end of the fifth until Bobby Abreu¡¯s infield single leading off the ninth. It was a hit in name only. A charging Derek Jeter fielded the slow bouncer but could not get it out of his glove in time. It came on Kuroda¡¯s 109th pitch and was enough to bring Girardi out of the dugout to summon Robertson as Kuroda walked off the field to a standing ovation from his newest fans.
¡°It was the greatest feeling in the world,¡± he said through his interpreter, ¡°and I¡¯d like to continue it as much as I can.¡±
Before Kuroda even had a chance to process his emotions, Robertson induced a sharp double play ball from Pujols, and then struck out Kendrys Morales to end the game.
The Yankees, losers of their first three games, improved to 4-3.
¡°Hopefully there¡¯s a lot more of that to come,¡± Rodriguez said.
The afternoon began with Posada, who retired after last season, lobbing the first pitch to his father, Jorge Sr. as the fans showered Posada with applause.
Kuroda took the mound and allowed a ground ball single up the middle from Aybar. But he got the next three batters, and then returned to the dugout to watch his offense go to work.
Angels starter Ervin Santana struck out Jeter and Granderson, but Rodriguez, batting third in the Yankees newest lineup configuration against right-handed starters, ripped a single to left. Robinson Cano, now batting fourth, walked, as did Mark Teixeira, bringing up Swisher.
In his previous at-bat on Wednesday, Swisher hit a two-run homer in the 10th inning to lead the Yankees to a win in Baltimore. This time he drilled a pitch that hit the wall in right-center on a bounce. All three runners scored as Swisher pounded his hands together and gave his customary salute as the fans roared.
¡°It was electric,¡± Swisher said. ¡°I didn¡¯t know what to do.¡±
In the new lineup, designed by Girardi to alternate right and left-handed hitters, Rodriguez pounded a first-pitch home run to dead center in the third. In the fifth Granderson sent a ball over the right-field wall.
Kuroda acknowledged feeling some nerves, but said it was reassuring to have Russell Martin, his catcher with the Los Angeles Dodgers from 2008-9, behind the plate. Kuroda proved he can pitch at Yankee Stadium. He then showed he knows how to act like a Yankee teammate, too.
¡°That is a great lineup,¡± he said. ¡°Russell knows the hitters. He did a great job and all the credit goes to him.¡±
