LONDON ¡ª John Henry is the principal owner of two of the sporting world¡¯s most visible, storied and valuable franchises ¡ª the of Boston and the Reds of Liverpool. Yet at the moment, his baseball and soccer teams are united not in towering success but in stunning collapse.
The Red Sox finished 7-20 last September and missed the playoffs. The new season has brought a nervous start. Meanwhile, Liverpool has won only 3 of its 14 Premier League matches in 2012 and has had its reputation sullied in the clumsy handling of a case of on-field racial taunting by Luis Su¨¢rez, its star Uruguayan forward.
On Thursday, Liverpool , Damien Comolli, a Frenchman. In effect, Comolli took the fall for the profligate spending of about $175 million over the past 17 months in player acquisitions that have produced mediocre results. The signings generally appeared to contradict the ¡°Moneyball¡± approach, favored by Henry, to spend judiciously on capable, lesser-known players.
¡°We feel there is enough talent on the pitch to win,¡± Tom Werner, Liverpool¡¯s (and the Red Sox¡¯) American chairman, told reporters, ¡°and we¡¯ve been dissatisfied, as most supporters have been, with the results so far.¡±
On Saturday at Wembley Stadium, Liverpool found some consolation with the awakening of the somnolent forward Andy Carroll and a late 2-1 victory over its city rival Everton in a semifinal of the F.A. Cup, a tournament open to all divisions of English soccer. In February, Liverpool won the Carling Cup, a lesser domestic tournament that put hardware in the club¡¯s trophy case for the first time in six years.
A second trophy, the F.A. Cup, would mitigate the disappointment but not redeem this season for many Liverpool fans. Manchester United appears headed toward a 20th league title, while Liverpool remains stuck for two decades on 18, last having won a league crown in 1990, its present struggles a dim comparison with a shimmering past.
Drifting in eighth place in the Premier League, Liverpool will miss out on next season¡¯s European Champions League, considered the world¡¯s best club competition, for the third consecutive season. The absence could lead to the loss of $45 million or more in revenue and to a decreased willingness of top players to join the club.
¡°It would be good to win two cups, but I guess the majority of fans would probably still be disappointed,¡± said Peter Harmsworth, 59, a family therapist from Liverpool. ¡°Liverpool won¡¯t have been seen as making any progress since last year, while Manchester United has continued to do well. That¡¯s what really gets people, when your biggest rival wins again.¡±
The Red Sox and Liverpool have struggled recently from the extravagant acquisitions of players who have underperformed. Most noticeably this has been the case with Boston outfielder Carl Crawford and Liverpool¡¯s Carroll, who was bought from Newcastle in January 2011 for $55.8 million, a club record, but who has since delivered only six goals in the Premier League and 10 over all.
¡°You think of the optimism both fan bases seemed to have 12 to 18 months ago, versus both fan bases being pretty dejected at the moment,¡± said Jonathan Meltzer, 26, a second-year Yale Law School student and a fan of the Red Sox and Liverpool.
In fairness, Henry, who made his fortune as a futures trader and who did not respond to a request for an interview, remains a respected owner in both cities. His Red Sox, after all, won the World Series in 2004 and 2007 after eight decades of futility.
Still, in Boston, where the Red Sox have started slowly for the second consecutive season, there is some itchy concern in the news media that Henry may be paying too much attention to soccer and not enough to baseball.
¡°He¡¯s had the appearance of being distracted, absent, focused elsewhere,¡± said Dan Shaughnessy, a longtime columnist at The Boston Globe.
In England, the news-media portrayal of Henry is as an attentive, even ruthless, owner who has a clear strategy for success and is impatient with failure. ¡°Americans show who is in control,¡± The Times of London said in a Friday headline after Comolli was fired.
