Yu Darvish kept wriggling out of trouble, Josh Hamilton had a home run and the Texas Rangers beat the host Minnesota Twins, 6-2, on Saturday.
The Twins¡¯ Denard Span had a run-scoring double that tied the game at 2-2 in the sixth, but Minnesota failed to score after loading the bases loaded in three innings.
, making his second start in the major leagues, was removed after loading the bases with two outs in the sixth.
¡°He was much better,¡± Rangers Manager Ron Washington said. ¡°Still have to work on getting ahead of hitters quicker. But he was much better today with his command.¡±
Darvish gave up both Twins runs on nine hits. With the bases loaded in the second and the fifth innings, he escaped with strikeouts. He also prevented a run in the fourth by tagging out Ryan Doumit at home when a pitch in the dirt bounced away from catcher Mike Napoli.
¡°The main adjustment I have to make right now is knowing the hitters, knowing the teams,¡± Darvish said through an interpreter.
The former Yankees Jesus Montero, who had a solo home run and a two-run double, and Hector Noesi, who threw eight shutout innings, carried host Seattle. Noesi (1-1) gave up five hits and struck out six in his first victory as a starter.
David Ortiz drove in five runs and hit one of host Boston¡¯s five home runs. The game was tied at 5-5 in the seventh when Mike Aviles hit a homer to ignite a three-run inning for the Red Sox. Boston added five runs in the eighth, a day after scoring eight in that inning.
Before the game, the Red Sox placed Jacoby on the 15-day disabled list with a partly dislocated right shoulder.
Gavin Floyd pitched six scoreless innings and Alexei Ramirez, Tyler Flowers and Paul Konerko homered to help host Chicago win its fourth straight.
Nolan Reimold of Baltimore hit a tiebreaking two-run homer in the top of the ninth inning off Toronto¡¯s Francisco Cordero.
Shin-Soo Choo hit a two-run double with two outs in the 10th as visiting Cleveland won a contentious game. Most of the beefing was the result of Choo¡¯s being hit by a pitch from Jonathan Sanchez in the third. It resulted in the benches clearing, probably because last season Sanchez hit Choo and broke his thumb.
In the bottom of the inning, Indians starter Jeanmar Gomez got everyone to their feet again when he plunked Mike Moustakas. The plate umpire Gary Darling ejected Gomez, Indians Manager Manny Acta and third baseman Jack Hannahan, who had gone nose to nose with Royals Manager Ned Yost.
With the bases loaded in the bottom of the ninth, Melky Cabrera reached first for host San Francisco on a throwing error by Clint Barmes.
Ted Lilly pitched seven innings of two-hit ball for host Los Angeles after coming off the disabled list. The Dodgers (8-1) are off to their best start since 1981, when they won the World Series.
Houston rallied to beat host Miami as closer Heath Bell struggled for the third time in three outings in his first season with the Marlins.
Mike Minor pitched two-hit ball into the eighth inning to give host Atlanta¡¯s rotation a lift. Minor (1-1) recorded 18 consecutive outs after hitting Corey Hart with a pitch to open the second inning.
In Washington, Edwin Jackson threw a nine-strikeout complete game as the Nationals won their fifth straight.
Lance Lynn pitched effectively into the sixth inning and Yadier Molina had two hits and two runs batted in, for host St. Louis.
Brian Wilson, 30, the San Francisco closer who led the majors with 48 saves in 2010, is probably headed for surgery on his right elbow after an M.R.I. revealed structural damage, team officials said.
Jayson Werth¡¯s bases-loaded single to lead Washington past Cincinnati, 2-1, made him the first big leaguer since 1963 to deliver a game-ending R.B.I. in the 13th inning on Friday the 13th.
