Avery Bradley hit three straight 3-pointers and scored 11 of his 18 points in a game-deciding third quarter as the surging Boston Celtics defeated the Nets, 94-82, on Saturday night at Prudential Center.
Kevin Garnett had 21 points and 12 rebounds to lead the Celtics, who have won 10 of 13 and 20 of 28 to take over first place in the Atlantic Division.
Rajon Rondo added 15 assists, Brandon Bass had 18 points and Paul Pierce 17 for Boston, which limited the Nets to 34 second-half points in beating them for the third time in three games this season.
Gerald Green had 15 points to lead the Nets, while the rookie Jordan Williams had 12 points and a career-best 14 rebounds in recording his first double-double. Deron Williams had 12 points and 14 assists for the Nets, who had won six of their last nine in their best run of the season. MarShon Brooks added 13 points.
The Celtics outscored the Nets by 26-13 in the third quarter. Bradley was the catalyst in a late 13-4 surge in which he hit three straight 3-pointers from the right corner, near the Nets¡¯ bench.
¡°We know what he can do,¡± Pierce said. ¡°It¡¯s just about him developing his confidence, and I said it over and over again, the more he plays and the more we show confidence in him.¡±
The Boston veteran Ray Allen missed his third straight game with soreness and swelling in his right ankle. Coach Doc Rivers said Allen would not play in Charlotte on Sunday.
Kevin Durant scored 43 points and Russell Westbrook had 35 points and 8 assists as Oklahoma City defeated host Minnesota.
Anthony Randolph had 22 points and 11 rebounds and Michael Beasley scored 26 for the Timberwolves, who lost their 9th straight game and 25th in a row in April dating to 2009.
Tim Duncan had 19 points and 10 rebounds as host San Antonio remained a game behind Oklahoma City for the No. 1 seed in the Western Conference. Sebastian Telfair scored 21 points for Phoenix, which is one and a half games behind Denver and Houston, who hold the final two playoff spots in the West.
O. J. Mayo scored 17 of his 20 points in the fourth quarter to fuel host Memphis¡¯s rally past Utah. Rudy Gay had 26 points and 12 rebounds for the Grizzlies, who dropped the Jazz two games behind Houston and Denver.
Chris Paul had 28 points and 13 assists as Los Angeles beat visiting Golden State to close to a game behind the idle Lakers for the Pacific Division lead.
Blake Griffin scored 20 points, DeAndre Jordan 18 and Mo Williams 14 in the Clippers¡¯ third straight win and the 11th in their last 13 games. They are chasing the Lakers for the third playoff seed in the Western Conference with six games remaining.
The reserve Nate Robinson led the Warriors with 28 points, including four 3-pointers. David Lee, Richard Jefferson, Andrew Bogut and Stephen Curry of sat out with injuries.
Roy Hibbert had 23 points and 14 rebounds, including six free throws in the final 74 seconds, to lead Indiana to a victory at Milwaukee.
Monta Ellis had 20 points for the Bucks, who fell two and a half games behind the Knicks and Philadelphia, who hold the last two playoff spots in the Eastern Conference.
Fresh off a stint in the N.B.A. Development League, Luke Harangody had 16 points and 10 rebounds to lead Cleveland to victory at Washington.
Kobe Bryant will probably miss his fifth straight game when the Lakers host Dallas on Sunday. Coach Mike Brown said that Bryant, the N.B.A. scoring leader, was likely to rest his bruised left shin.
