LONDON ¡ª? Fabrice Muamba, the player whose heart stopped beating in a crowded stadium on Saturday, was alive but still gravely ill in a hospital on Tuesday.
The cardiac specialists keep vigil. The games play on.
There is a tremor in the pulse of the sport, not simply in England, where Muamba fell, but around the world. Players who know him, and thousands who do not, offer prayers through their Twitter accounts, and Real Madrid¡¯s team entered the field on Sunday wearing shirts with a double message.
One side of their white shirts bore the words ¡°Get well soon Muamba.¡± The other side read ¡°Animo Abidal,¡± a goodwill message to the Barcelona defender ?ric Abidal, who needs a liver transplant.
This drawing together of emotions cuts across the differences that fuel sometimes bitter rivalries in soccer¡¯s so-called ¡°family.¡±
Kevin Davies, the senior player on Muamba¡¯s team, Bolton Wanderers, rode in the ambulance with Muamba as he was taken to a hospital Saturday. ¡°I felt powerless,¡± Davies said Monday. ¡°He¡¯s a colleague, friend, father and son. You stand there on the sidelines and there¡¯s nothing you can do.
¡°At the hospital, people came running through the doors, giving up their Saturday evening to help Fabrice. We¡¯re all so grateful to them for giving him a bit of hope.¡±
A bit of hope. Davies, a veteran of almost 700 games, managed to temper his words directly in line with the hospital statements that while Muamba was breathing without assistance and showing appropriate responses to family and to essential questions, he remains seriously ill and under 24-hour surveillance.
It is too soon to tell whether the brain suffered irreparable damage. Despite the rapid response of well-equipped doctors and medical volunteers where he fell, despite the encouragement drawn from players of London clubs who visited him all day Monday, he is not out of danger yet.
His fianc¨¦e, who goes by Shauna Muamba on Twitter, is the mother of their three-year-old son. On Sunday, she posted on the Web site: ¡°God is in control. Please keep praying for fmuamba its really helping I can feel it.¡± And the games play on.
On Tuesday, Bolton¡¯s chairman and its team manager remained close to the hospital. The day before in Bolton, almost 200 miles, or 320 kilometers, to the north, Davies relayed news to the players. ¡°Everyone got a call on Sunday,¡± he said. ¡°If they wanted to come in and train, they could. A few of the boys did, but it might be the right decision for another player to stay at home with his family.¡±
Like a father figure, the 34-year-old Davies checked on younger teammates, like Ryo Miyaichi, a 19-year-old winger whose family is in Japan. Miyaichi has been at Bolton on loan from Arsenal since January.
¡°We¡¯re trying to stick together, and trying to put an arm around each other,¡± Davies said. ¡°I go into the gym and, out of frustration, throw a few weights around. That¡¯s right for me. It¡¯s not necessarily right for others.¡± Bolton must decide when to play again. Its league match scheduled for Tuesday against Aston Villa was called off, and its local derby against Blackburn Rovers on Saturday, an intense relegation struggle, could also be postponed.
¡°You ask yourself, what would Fabrice want you to do?¡± said Davies. ¡°Hopefully, we can ask him in a few days.¡± But Bolton isn¡¯t alone in this.
The Tottenham players who shared the field Saturday in the abandoned game included Beno?t Assou-Ekotto, a countryman of Marc-Vivien Fo¨¦, who died of heart failure during a game in France in 2003.
¡°When I saw Muamba lying on the pitch, I was scared,¡± said Assou-Ekotto. ¡°Scared for him, scared for his family, his friends and all those who know him and who care about him.
