The appears to have hit a speed bump. A report released Monday revealed violations in the university¡¯s men¡¯s and women¡¯s basketball programs that the deemed ¡°major.¡±
A nearly three-year investigation yielded a summary disposition, essentially the facts as agreed upon by the N.C.A.A. and Baylor, and Monday. The most significant of the violations appears to be more than 1,200 illegal phone calls by Baylor staff members.
Baylor¡¯s punishment is expected to be announced by the N.C.A.A. this week, but it is not expected to be significantly different from the university¡¯s self-imposed sanctions. According to the summary disposition, Baylor¡¯s men¡¯s program has docked itself two scholarships and prohibited Coach Scott Drew and an assistant, Jerome Tang, from making recruiting phone calls for two months.
The women¡¯s program is expected to receive similar penalties and is in no danger of losing the national title it captured last week. The penalties include Coach Kim Mulkey¡¯s being held out of recruiting this summer, and the program has already docked itself two scholarships.
The results of the investigation also found that a former Baylor men¡¯s assistant, Mark Morefield, tried to get Amateur Athletic Union coaches to lie to the N.C.A.A. concerning text messages. In 2007, the Baylor men¡¯s program also paid four men tied to recruiting services up to $500 to evaluate players at the camp. Baylor canceled its elite camp from 2008 to 2011 as punishment.
¡° has been involved in a three-year joint investigation with the N.C.A.A. enforcement staff,¡± the Baylor spokesman Nick Joos said. ¡°The university has not received the release outlining the final decision from the N.C.A.A. committee on infractions concerning the case.¡±
Drew has emerged as a divisive figure in college basketball. His critics, like Texas Coach Rick Barnes, have publicly questioned Drew¡¯s recruiting tactics. for hiring the summer basketball coach of point guard John Wall, who ended up attending Kentucky.
Drew attempts to maintain an innocent image. He has had a rule of not swearing, taken a reporter to church and given another peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwiches to prove he is down to earth.
This is Baylor¡¯s second brush with the N.C.A.A. under Drew, who has twice led the Bears to the Round of 8 in the N.C.A.A. tournament. The star player for taking impermissible benefits from his summer basketball coach. (Jones announced Monday that he would skip his final two seasons to enter the .) Drew also denied and his family that Baylor attempted to recruit Cooper illegally.
But Drew¡¯s standing with Baylor appears clear. A high-ranking university official, who was not authorized to speak publicly on the matter, said Monday, ¡°Scott has the support of the university.¡±
The more surprising part of the announcement may have come with Baylor¡¯s women¡¯s program, which went 40-0 this season. According to the ESPN report, multiple violations involved the recruitment of the star Brittney Griner, including instances of impermissible communication.
