The resolved one franchise headache Friday when it announced the sale of the , a ward of the league since 2010, to Tom Benson, the owner of the Saints, for $338 million.
But the league also faced the collapse of a tentative deal to build an arena for the , and the very real possibility that the franchise would move, .
¡°I think that there¡¯s nothing further to be done,¡± N.B.A. Commissioner David Stern said during a news conference in Manhattan after a meeting of the league¡¯s board of governors. ¡°I think we have done as much as we can do.¡±
Now, Stern said, he can ensure that the Kings will play in Sacramento only through 2014.
The tentative deal between the city and the Maloof family, which owns the Kings, was reached in February in Orlando, Fla. George Maloof said in a telephone interview that his family had agreed to the financial terms of a new arena but that numerous issues had not been resolved.
¡°We had a basic financial framework, but from the moment we received the term sheet on Feb. 19, we had questions,¡± he said. Those concerns included the length of the lease, approval of the proposed arena¡¯s design, game-day expenses at the new facility and naming rights.
On Thursday, Mayor Kevin Johnson of Sacramento, the former N.B.A. star, told the Maloofs in a letter, ¡°Under no circumstances will the city make material adjustments to the current terms of the deal.¡±
That message was reinforced at a meeting Friday in Manhattan between Johnson and the Maloofs.
¡°We couldn¡¯t work it out,¡± Maloof said. He said that Johnson was not interested in contributing to a possible renovation of Power Balance Pavilion, the team¡¯s home, an option that Maloof said the family first raised Friday.
In a news conference, Johnson said that the Maloofs were on their own if they renovated the arena.
¡°I don¡¯t know what the Maloofs plan to do,¡± he said. ¡°I know they don¡¯t plan to honor their commitment to a downtown arena.¡±
Maloof said that filing an application to relocate was ¡°not something we¡¯re thinking about.¡±
Stern said that it was the Maloofs¡¯ right to back out of the nonbinding deal, which called for a contribution of at least $73 million from the Maloofs and $255 million from the city.
The league was going to lend the Maloofs $67 million and contribute $7 million to the project.
By selling the Hornets to Benson, the league made back the $318 million it paid in late 2009 when it acquired the money-losing franchise from George Shinn, and about $20 million more to cover its losses.
Adam Silver, the deputy commissioner, said the league was not looking to make a profit on the deal or engage in a bidding war. ¡°For one of the smallest markets, it¡¯s a very full price,¡± he added.
In Benson, Stern said, ¡°We really have found the perfect owner.¡±
He later added, ¡°We were working very hard together to get rid of present ownership.¡±
Benson, 84, said that he still would have tried to buy the Hornets had he not owned the Saints.
¡°The Hornets are so important to New Orleans,¡± said Benson, who was once a minority owner of the San Antonio Spurs. ¡°If you would have been on the phone with the governor, I thought he was coming through to kiss me.¡±
The Hornets left Charlotte for New Orleans after the 2001-2 season and had to move to Oklahoma City for two seasons after devastated the city. They became a stronger team with point guard Chris Paul in 2005, winning 56 games in 2007-8, 49 games in 2008-9 and 46 games last season.
But after the lockout ended last December, Paul was traded to the Los Angeles Clippers. This season, the Hornets are 17-42.
The Hornets can potentially benefit from the Saints¡¯ success in selling sponsorships and their season-ticket base of 71,000.
The Saints have done ¡°exceedingly well to tap into a modest-sized market,¡± said Marc Ganis, a sports industry consultant who advised Benson on the Hornets¡¯ purchase.
