The upheld the season-long suspension of Coach on Monday, and the shorter suspensions of two other team executives, as the league continued to grapple with the?bounty scandal that has overshadowed much of the off-season.
By keeping in place the original suspensions he handed down nearly three weeks ago, Commissioner rejected a defense that Gregg Williams, the former defensive coordinator who oversaw the bounty system, was a rogue coach, as the lawyer for one of the Saints officials called him.
Payton¡¯s suspension without pay, originally scheduled to begin April 1, will now start April 16, meaning the appeal gave him two extra weeks to prepare the Saints for the draft and beyond. He will not be allowed football-related contact with players or team officials during his suspension. The eight-game suspension of General Manager Mickey Loomis and the six-game suspension of the assistant head coach, Joe Vitt, will begin at the end of the preseason.
The N.F.L. said in a statement that if everyone cooperated going forward, Goodell would consider reducing the financial penalties on Payton, Loomis and Vitt and altering the forfeiture of the Saints¡¯ second-round draft choice in 2013 to a pick in a lower round. If the team has a bad season in 2012 and the 2013 draft pick is high in the second round, the league would consider changing the punishment to several lower-round picks instead.
The team has also been fined $500,000 and will lose a second-round pick in 2012. Goodell will consider reinstating Payton after the next February. Loomis and Vitt will serve their suspensions and then be considered for reinstatement. Williams, now the defensive coordinator for the St. Louis Rams, did not appeal his indefinite suspension.
The Saints declined comment on Goodell¡¯s decision.
¡°The club and the individuals will be expected to cooperate in any further proceedings and to assist in the development and implementation of programs to instruct players and coaches at all levels on principles of player safety, fair play, and sportsmanship,¡± the N.F.L. said in its statement.
The conclusion of the discipline process for the Saints officials means the team will shortly have to decide on who will be Payton¡¯s interim replacement. While the Saints have considered elevating several internal candidates ¡ª including the offensive coordinator Pete Carmichael Jr. and the defensive coordinator Steve Spagnuolo ¡ª Payton has also discussed the job with his mentor, Bill Parcells. Parcells, the former coach of the Giants, the New England Patriots, the Jets and the Dallas Cowboys, has not coached since 2006, but he has made clear over the last few weeks that he was giving serious consideration to taking over the Saints, in large part because of his relationship with Payton.
Parcells played golf with Payton and Loomis two weeks ago, but said at the time that there were still issues to be resolved and that he was still not sure he would take the job. The Saints would have to interview at least one minority candidate to be in compliance with the Rooney Rule. As of late last week, the team had not done so while awaiting the outcome of the appeals process.
When asked Monday afternoon if he had any further talks with the Saints about the job, Parcells replied in a text message, ¡°Absolutely none.¡±
Whoever replaces Payton ?will take over with less than two weeks until the draft and on the same day that players are allowed to report to the team facility to begin voluntary off-season workouts. It is unclear whether quarterback Drew Brees, the team leader who is unhappy that he has not received a long-term contract and that the team placed the franchise tag on him, will report for those workouts.
Brees¡¯s presence will be a critical issue for a team that still is waiting to hear how some players that the N.F.L. said were involved in the bounties will be disciplined.
The N.F.L. investigation said 22 to 27 players were involved, but the league is expected to discipline only a few of the defensive leaders, among them linebacker Jonathan Vilma, who, according to the league¡¯s investigation, offered $10,000 of his own money if a teammate knocked Brett Favre, then Minnesota¡¯s quarterback, out of the N.F.C. championship game.
The players union has hired outside counsel, Richard Smith of Fulbright & Jaworski, to advise it on the bounty case and to provide representation if criminal charges are brought, although that is extremely unlikely.
Representatives of the union and the league met last week to review the N.F.L.¡¯s investigation. In the meeting, the league showed the union representatives some of the evidence it gathered, including a PowerPoint presentation the Saints had that tracked the pay-for-performance scheme.
According to a person briefed on the meeting, the union representatives, who included Smith, were also told about other pieces of evidence, but were not shown anything or given copies of possible additional evidence.
The union also did not believe it was shown proof that Vilma offered his own money or that the league had firmly established that Saints players went into games intending to injure their opponents.
¡°We did meet with the league, and the information provided to us has not matched up with the leaks and the evidence in the public domain,¡± the union spokesman George Atallah said.
