became a major league player in July 1994 as an 18-year-old phenom, a No. 1 pick with half a season of minor league experience before the Seattle Mariners called him to join on their big-league roster. At the time, Griffey was perhaps baseball¡¯s biggest rising star, and Rodriguez appeared set to join him.
They were teammates when the Mariners beat the in an American League division series in 1995 and won the American League West title in 1997. Two decades later, Rodriguez and Griffey share an exclusive spot in baseball history.
On Friday, more than 17 years after Rodriguez first became Griffey¡¯s teammate, he tied Griffey for fifth place on baseball¡¯s career home run list with 630. Rodriguez¡¯s third-inning shot to center field in the Yankees¡¯ 5-0 victory over the Angels was his first of the season. Only Willie Mays, Babe Ruth, Hank Aaron and Barry Bonds have hit more home runs than Rodriguez.
¡°It definitely means I¡¯m getting old,¡± the 36-year-old Rodriguez said of the milestone. ¡°Grif is special to me, because we came up together. He was a teammate, a brother and a mentor all in one.¡±
It was also an important outing for Rodriguez, who struggled in the first week of the season with only 4 hits in 23 at-bats. In past years, a slow opening week would not have prompted concern, but Rodriguez was limited to 99 games last season because of injury and has not hit more than 30 home runs since 2008. Another relatively lackluster season could signal that Rodriguez, baseball¡¯s highest-paid player, can no longer generate the power that allowed him to ascend the home run list in the first place.
Manager Joe Girardi moved Rodriguez to the No. 3 spot in the batting order from No. 4, although neither Girardi nor Rodriguez cited the move as the reason for Rodriguez¡¯s 3-for-4 performance.
¡°Do I see a lot different? Not really,¡± Girardi said of Rodriguez.
All of the Yankees runs came during innings in which Rodriguez recorded a hit.
Rodriguez¡¯s best game of the season even included a stolen base, his second. That could be the greatest indicator that his legs feel as strong as he insists they do. In each of the past two seasons he was limited to four stolen bases, after averaging 20 a year in his first six years in New York.
¡°Either it¡¯s a sign I feel good, or a sign of stupidity,¡± Rodriguez said.
