Sean Couturier and Claude Giroux each scored three goals and the rallied for a wild 8-5 victory over the on Friday night in Game 2 of their Eastern Conference quarterfinal series.
Giroux added three assists for Philadelphia, and the former Penguins Max Talbot and Jaromir Jagr also scored to help the Flyers take a 2-0 lead in the best-of-seven series. Game 3 is Sunday in Philadelphia.
Ilya Bryzgalov overcame another shaky start to stop 23 shots for the Flyers, who rallied from two early two-goal deficits.
Chris Kunitz had two goals for Pittsburgh, and Sidney Crosby and Tyler Kennedy scored for the second straight game, but the Penguins failed to close out the Flyers for the second time in three days. The game mirrored Philadelphia¡¯s 4-3 overtime win in Game 1 on Wednesday. Pittsburgh raced to a 3-0 lead in that one only to succumb on Jakub Voracek¡¯s goal less than three minutes into the extra session.
The Penguins tried to play down their collapse in the opener, insisting there was plenty of hockey to play.
Maybe, but there might not be much left after another stirring comeback by the Flyers. Philadelphia is 17-0 when it wins the first two games of a series.
The Flyers stressed the importance of getting off to better starts after their Game 1 escape, saying they know they cannot afford to keep spotting the high-powered Penguins a big lead.
In the end, it did not matter. Pittsburgh led by 2-0, 3-1, 4-3 and 5-4 but it still was not enough.
Kennedy¡¯s goal early in the third that put the Penguins up, 5-4, appeared to give the Penguins the big goal they needed.
Instead, Couturier scored 17 seconds later to tie it again, and Jagr put the Flyers in front for the first time with less than 11 minutes to go. Couturier netted the clincher with 1:49 remaining before Giroux capped his 6-point night with an empty-net goal.
¡°I don¡¯t know how many times we¡¯ll be able to do comebacks like that,¡± Giroux said. ¡°We¡¯ve got to have a better start.¡±
Ian White and Cory Emmerton scored in the first period, and Detroit got the best revenge against host Nashville with a victory that evened the opening series at 1-1.
Johan Franzen also scored, and Jimmy Howard made 24 saves as the Red Wings answered Nashville defenseman Shea Weber¡¯s being fined only $2,500 for smashing Henrik Zetterberg¡¯s head into the glass at the end of Game 1 on Wednesday night.
Todd Bertuzzi dropped the gloves with Weber 1 minute 36 seconds into the game and landed a solid punch before they were separated.
Game 3 is Sunday in Detroit.
