More than a decade before the former football assistant Jerry Sandusky was charged with child sexual abuse, a psychologist warned the university police in an investigation into a suspected assault of an 11-year-old boy that Sandusky¡¯s actions in that case fit a ¡°likely pedophile¡¯s pattern.¡± But the university seemed to do nothing about Sandusky in the wake of that .
What is unknown is whether senior officials at Penn State were unaware of the investigation, or whether they knew of it but chose to do nothing.
The details of the investigation were made public Saturday in an NBC News broadcast. NBC News, which obtained the police report and the assessments of two psychologists who had interviewed the 11-year-old boy, did not initially release the documents with the .
The investigation uncovered a clear warning about Sandusky, then the defensive coordinator for the Nittany Lions. Sandusky was charged late last year with more than 50 counts of child sexual abuse. He is 10 boys from 1994 to 2009.
¡°I was horrified to know that there were so many other innocent boys who had their hearts and minds confused, their bodies violated,¡± Alycia A. Chambers, a therapist for the boy identified as Victim 6 in the report by the grand jury that indicted Sandusky, told NBC News. ¡°It¡¯s unspeakable.¡±
Sandusky, 68, has maintained his innocence. Last week, his lawyer, Joseph Amendola, asked a judge to dismiss the sexual abuse charges against Sandusky. On Saturday, Amendola issued a statement saying the NBC report had raised new questions ¡°which will be formulated into additional discovery requests we will submit to the attorney general in the near future, hopefully, for disposition at the April 5 hearing on Jerry¡¯s motions.¡±
Bill Mahon, a spokesman for Penn State, said in a statement, ¡°The university can have no comment on issues relating to the Sandusky investigations in the past or present.¡± He added that Penn State was ¡°fully cooperating¡± with the authorities.
The campus police¡¯s 1998 report totaled almost 100 pages, but the district attorney at the time decided against taking the case to trial. People with knowledge of the active Sandusky case told The New York Times that the district attorney¡¯s decision in 1998 was seen as a close call, even with the evidence that the Penn State police had.
Prosecutors have said that Gary Schultz, the university official charged with overseeing the campus police, told a grand jury that he recalled being aware of an incident involving Sandusky¡¯s showering with a boy at Penn State¡¯s athletic complex, and the subsequent investigation.
Joe Paterno, the football coach at the time, and Graham B. Spanier, then the university president, each said that he had not been told about the investigation. They were fired in November in the midst of the scandal. In January, Paterno died of lung cancer at 85.
Paterno informed Sandusky at a meeting in May 1999 that he would not become Penn State¡¯s next head coach. Sandusky retired after the 1999 season and committed to working at the Second Mile, a youth foundation he started in 1977.
NBC News reported that Chambers described the way Sandusky goaded the 11-year-old boy into the shower after a workout, telling him, ¡°All the guys do.¡± Chambers wrote, ¡°My consultants agree that the incidents meet all of our definitions, based on experience and education, of a likely pedophile¡¯s pattern of building trust and gradual introduction of physical touch, within a context of a ¡®loving,¡¯ ¡®special¡¯ relationship.¡±
On May 7, 1998, Chambers gave her report to a Penn State police detective, Ronald Schreffler, with a cover letter that highlighted ¡°the gravity of the incidents.¡± Schreffler worked on the case with a state welfare department investigator, Gerald Lauro.
NBC News reported that investigators also called on a second psychologist, John Seasock, who had worked with the Centre County Child and Youth Services, a local agency that had licensed Sandusky as a foster parent. After meeting with the boy for an hour, Seasock concluded that no sexual offense had taken place.
On May 19, 1998, still working under the supervision of the district attorney, Penn State¡¯s campus police officers set up a sting operation. The boy¡¯s mother met Sandusky and confronted him, with the police monitoring the conversation.
Sandusky admitted to showering with her son and another boy and said that he did not think that his private parts had touched her son, but acknowledged that what he had done was wrong.
¡°I wish I could get forgiveness,¡± Sandusky was quoted as saying. ¡°I know I won¡¯t get it from you. I wish I were dead.¡±
A week and a half later, according to NBC News, Schreffler and Lauro interviewed Sandusky at his office. The police report said that Sandusky had admitted to hugging the boy in the shower and to showering with other boys and had said he realized he used poor judgment in doing so.
¡°As a result of the investigation, it could not be determined that a sexual assault occurred and Sandusky was advised of such,¡± the 1998 police report read. One investigator then advised Sandusky not to shower with children and he agreed.
The report concluded, ¡°Case Closed.¡±
