GREENBURGH, N.Y. ¡ª Brian Boyle was circumspect Friday about Senators defenseman Erik Karlsson, whom he in the head while Karlsson, 8 inches shorter and 65 pounds lighter, hung on for dear life during a second-period scrum in Game 1 of the ¡¯ 4-2 win over Ottawa on Thursday.
Somehow Boyle and Karlsson received coincidental minors for that exchange, and perhaps the desire to let sleeping dogs lie is why Boyle said little more after practice than ¡°Karlsson¡¯s a good player, and we¡¯re trying to deny him time and space.¡±
Instead, the Rangers extolled the play of Carl Hagelin¡¯s playoff debut. A speedy rookie, Hagelin sparked the Rangers¡¯ second goal by forcing Sergei Gonchar to turn over the puck, which was eventually . Hagelin also created by stealing the puck from Nick Foligno and in one swift motion setting up another linemate, Brad Richards.
¡°He¡¯s got speed,¡± Richards said Friday, about to deliver an intriguing analysis of Hagelin¡¯s game and why it is so effective. ¡°He¡¯s in on every forecheck. He¡¯s in on people¡¯s heels. The turnover last night was all because of his speed on my goal. Other people know he¡¯s around ¡ª he¡¯s quick, and it causes them to do things sometimes a little quicker than they¡¯d like, or not as patient as they¡¯d like, and that¡¯ll create turnovers. He¡¯s always buzzing.
¡°If you can get the puck it helps so much. Some nights it¡¯s going to be Hags, some nights it¡¯s Gabby, some nights it¡¯s me, whatever. But I think Hags is always doing something to pressure somebody or back them off. Couple times in the first period he backed them off and we got the zone because of his speed.¡±
Rangers coaches told the team¡¯s newly signed former collegian, Chris Kreider, to watch Game 1 from the press box and keep an eye on how Hagelin plays, not so much with the puck as without the puck. Richards also pointed out that Hagelin uses his speed not just in a conventional sense, to break away with the puck, but as a devastating forechecking tool.
¡°Speed helps ¡ª it¡¯s not just always beating a guy wide the puck,¡± Richards said. ¡°It just helps with the whole tempo of the game, and creating more ice in behind him, which a lot of the time allows me to get pucks and make plays.¡±
Perhaps most of all for Richards, there was Hagelin¡¯s preternatural poise.
¡°He¡¯s handled everything well,¡± Richards said. ¡°That¡¯s his first playoff game ever, starting lineup, M.S.G., and first shift he was in there battling. He jumped right in ¡ª he wasn¡¯t feeling it out. He was right in there. It¡¯s a great experience for him last night. Now the maturity level will have to kick even more, because it¡¯s not the first game anymore, and he¡¯ll keep getting better.¡±
Hagelin played for four years at Michigan before he came to the Rangers in a college career that included a game before 113,000 fans at Ann Arbor. Was he nervous before playing his first playoff game at a raucous Madison Square Garden?
¡°I was probably more nervous just coming up and playing my first N.H.L. game,¡± Hagelin said. ¡°I don¡¯t know if I was surprised I wasn¡¯t nervous ¡ª hockey¡¯s something I love to do, so it¡¯s more excitement. ¡°Just to hear the crowd during the national anthem really pumped me up,¡± he said. ¡°We¡¯ve been talking for a while now, how much fun it is to play in the playoffs and how the adrenaline is going to get everyone to play at their best level.¡±
Hagelin, who won the fastest-skater competition at All-Star weekend, talked about how he uses his speed alongside Richards and Gaborik.
¡°That¡¯s kind of my job description, that I chase down the puck and create turnovers,¡± he said. ¡°I let those guys do what they¡¯re good at, creating chances, holding onto the puck and making offensive plays.¡±
But Hagelin said he was not aware that the Rangers coaches had told Kreider to watch how he ¡°hounds the puck,¡± as Kreider put it. He certainly hounded the puck when he took it away from Foligno.
¡°I used my speed to try to chase him down,¡± Hagelin said. ¡°Obviously it¡¯s tough for him to make a play when I¡¯m that close. Instead of giving him a hit I tried to poke-check him and it bounced. The puck came out perfectly for my skates ¡ª it wasn¡¯t a hard pass to make. That¡¯s what I try to do for my line, and Richie was obviously in the perfect spot.¡±
Hagelin started the season with Connecticut in the A.H.L., even though Coach John Tortorella wanted him with the Rangers right away. But the decision was made to teach him in the A.H.L., and Hagelin learned fast. He joined the Rangers after just 17 games.
¡°The biggest thing for a guy coming into the league is his positioning away from the puck, and understanding game situations away from the puck,¡± Tortorella said. ¡°For a young guy, playing without the puck and understanding what he has to do and chasing things down like that, it¡¯s important. And that¡¯s been important for his two linemates.¡±
Tortorella added, ¡°We always talk about Richie and Gabby, but I tell you, I think Hags is just as important as either one of those guys if that line¡¯s going to work.¡±
