CHARLESTON, S.C. ¡ª In a farmhouse in the village of Durham Lead outside Melbourne, Australia, a single American dollar bill is framed and proudly displayed. Judy Tegart Dalton has kept that dollar for nearly 42 years, one small memento in the great battle for women¡¯s rights.
Dalton, now 74, was a member of the Original Nine, a group of women who defied the tennis establishment in 1970 and started their own tour.
They agreed to symbolic $1 contracts on Sept. 23, 1970, and commemorated the innovation with a black-and-white photograph of eight of the nine ¡ª joined by the promoter Gladys Heldman ¡ª smiling broadly as they held up dollar bills.
Almost 42 years later, the Original Nine were reunited here Friday night and honored as part of the 40th anniversary of the Family Circle Cup on nearby Daniel Island, the longest-running tournament on the women¡¯s tour.
It was the first time all nine ¡ª , Rosie Casals, Peaches Bartkowicz, Julie Heldman, Kerry Melville Reid, Kristy Pigeon, Nancy Richey, Valerie Ziegenfuss and Dalton ¡ª had been together since 1986, and only the second time since that tournament in Houston in 1970.
They sat down Friday afternoon to recreate that photograph ¡ª Julie Heldman in place of her mother, Gladys ¡ª smiling as they held up dollar bills once again. But maybe they should have been holding million-dollar checks instead. That is what today¡¯s players can earn because of the Original Nine.
¡°We had no idea that this little dollar would turn into millions,¡± Casals said Saturday. Not that they realized the effect of what they were doing at the time or what those dollars meant. Dalton is the only one who still has her dollar from 1970.
¡°For us, it was making a living,¡± said Heldman, the No. 5 player in the world in 1969, whose mother, Gladys, put together the Virginia Slims Invitational of Houston and ran a 19-tournament tour with $309,000 in prize money in 1971.
¡°It was being able to say that I am a woman athlete and this is what I do,¡± Heldman said.
¡°There was a couple of the top men tennis players said, ¡®You¡¯re taking money away from us if you want some of the prize money, because we¡¯re breadwinners.¡¯ Well, what were we? Toast winners?¡±
No, but they were largely on their own. With no women¡¯s tour, they had to play the same tournaments as men while earning a fraction of what the men were paid.
And the tiny purses came grudgingly.
¡°There was a tournament that, say, had $10,000 for the men and $1,500 for the women,¡± Richey said. ¡°You¡¯re talking about a huge disparity.¡±
So the nine women rebelled, boycotting a tournament where they were told that they would be paid an eighth or less of what the men were competing for. Instead, they signed those $1 contracts to play a small women¡¯s tournament in Houston in late September.
¡°We cut ourselves off from the U.S.T.A. because they said if you do that, you¡¯re going to be suspended,¡± said Richey, 69, the winner of two Grand Slam singles titles and sister of Cliff Richey, a former No. 1 men¡¯s player. ¡°So we didn¡¯t have anyplace to go. We didn¡¯t have anyplace to play. But we didn¡¯t have much, anyway. To me, it wasn¡¯t that big a gamble.¡±
The two Australians in the Original Nine, Dalton and Reid, were suspended by their tennis association and were forbidden to play in tournaments in their homeland.
Meanwhile, the United States Lawn Tennis Association, which had refused to start a tour for women before the boycott, reversed course and decided to run a tour to compete with the Virginia Slims tour. It was not until 1973 that King forged a merger and the Women¡¯s Tennis Association was born.
This year, tournament purses on the women¡¯s tour will total $96 million.
¡°That¡¯s why women¡¯s tennis really stands out among all female sports,¡± said Serena Williams, who is playing in the Family Circle Cup, which concludes Sunday.
¡°Because these nine ladies took a stand and said, ¡®We want this, and we want this to happen for us and for our tour.¡¯ And now look at us. I think we¡¯re the premier sport for all females.¡±
The effect of what they did was felt beyond tennis. As the WTA chief executive, Stacey Allaster, said Friday night during the dinner honoring the Original Nine: ¡°Not only did you give little girls the dream to play professional tennis, you gave little girls the dream they could be C.E.O.¡¯s of companies. So thank you.¡±
Their actions took place during the heyday of the women¡¯s movement in the early 1970s.
¡°I think we came in at a very unique time in history for women making statements,¡± said Casals, 63, who won nine Grand Slam doubles titles and three mixed-doubles titles. ¡°I always say, since then, things have been boring for women.¡±
Things have certainly changed. But the 68-year-old King, ever the fighter, says that there is more to be done, if not for tennis, then for women.
Asked if what they accomplished 42 years ago could happen today, King turned to Augusta National Golf Club, the home of the Masters.
The club has never allowed a woman to join, but it faces Virginia M. Rometty, the chief executive of I.B.M., a major sponsor of the Masters, because the company¡¯s four previous chief executives had been extended club memberships.
¡°It could,¡± King said, ¡°if all the women at I.B.M. said they were not going to work for a day.¡±
