BOSTON ¡ª He had become, through some fault of his own, the poster boy for the ¡¯ historic September swoon of 2011. The Boston right-hander Josh Beckett ate chicken and drank beer in the clubhouse while his teammates were on the field. He was neither repentant nor remorseful for the activity, though a few of his teammates, not to mention pretty much all of Red Sox Nation, felt otherwise.
Thus, it came as little surprise that Beckett received more than just a smattering of boos when his name was announced as the starting pitcher Friday in the Red Sox¡¯ home opener. On top of his questionable September behavior, which came during the team¡¯s 7-20 collapse, Beckett had been rocked last week in his season debut in Detroit, surrendering five home runs.
On the eve of his second start, he said defiantly that he would pitch for his teammates, if not for the fans. In the end, he did both, calming some jittery nerves after the Red Sox began their season by dropping five of their first six games.
Beckett put aside what he called ¡°a lot of exterior distractions¡± and stifled the over eight innings, as the Red Sox won their eighth straight home opener, 12-2. He was denied the satisfaction of a complete game, or even a cap-tipping exit to the sellout crowd of 37,032, when the Red Sox scored eight runs in the bottom of the eighth to take a 12-1 lead.
Even the beleaguered Red Sox bullpen can hold a lead like that.
¡°Just what the doctor ordered,¡± said the Red Sox Manager Bobby Valentine, who also heard a few boos when he was introduced. He shared that distinction alone with Beckett. No one else came in for a jeering, although John Lackey, out for the season with an arm injury, was not introduced. He and Beckett had been the chief ¡°chicken and beer¡± culprits.
¡°We were wondering and hoping, and he relieved all doubt,¡± Valentine said of Beckett. ¡°Threw great curveballs. Had terrific control. Threw all his fastballs over 90 miles an hour. That¡¯s the performance we were looking for. Home opener and everything else combined, that was a terrific outing.¡±
The only downer for the home team was a right-shoulder injury to their All-Star center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury. He had to leave the game in the fourth inning after shortstop Reid Brignac fell on the shoulder during a double play. Ellsbury was taken to Massachusetts General Hospital, and the Red Sox said he would undergo further evaluation.
While Beckett had been hammered in Detroit, history suggested he would be the polar opposite on Friday. And he was. Beckett has been nearly invincible in home openers since he came to the Red Sox in 2006, compiling a 4-0 record with a 2.41 earned run average in five home-opening starts. In those five starts, the Red Sox have scored 45 runs.
Beckett allowed three hits to the first six Tampa Bay hitters, giving the Rays a 1-0 lead in the second inning. Tampa Bay had a runner on third with only one out. But Beckett got out of the inning without further damage and allowed only two more hits, both two-out singles, over the next six innings.
He threw 94 pitches, the 90th being a curve ball to Carlos Pena, which led to his only strikeout of the game. That extended Beckett¡¯s strikeout string to 281 games (since Sept. 4, 2001) ¡ª the longest active streak in the majors and the second longest to begin a career. Dwight Gooden had a strikeout streak of 349 games from 1984 to 1997.
Beckett has also owned the Rays over the last two-plus seasons; he is 4-0 with a 0.84 earned run average against Tampa Bay in his last six starts dating to Sept. 12, 2009.
But none of that mattered on a sun-splashed afternoon at Fenway Park, a week before the ballpark¡¯s official centennial celebration. The last time the Red Sox played here, Sept. 21, 2011, Beckett was the losing pitcher and the team was booed off the field. Now, seven months later, the Red Sox were reeling, Beckett had a 13.50 earned run average after his Detroit outing and the Rays had their ace, David Price, on the mound.
¡°It¡¯s kinda tough,¡± Beckett said of the atmosphere as well as the expectations. ¡°You haven¡¯t been home in six weeks. Going to Detroit, obviously, the fans and that team are very, very excited with what they¡¯ve done in the off-season. Those guys were extra locked in. It¡¯s tough to start in a place like that.¡±
The Rays can relate. They are 2-10 in visiting home openers, and they could do nothing against Beckett. The Red Sox, meanwhile, got production from everyone, with ex-Rays catcher Kelly Shoppach reaching base four times, driving in two runs and collecting his first stolen base in 464 career games. Adrian Gonzalez had 3 of the team¡¯s 16 hits and Kevin Youklis, who came into the game with 2 hits in 20 at-bats, matched that hit total in 4 at-bats.
