On Monday, Commissioner will probably announce his decision on the discipline appeals by the . That leaves an entire weekend for the Gregg Williams audiotape to ring in the ears of football fans, an obscenity-laced, injury-detailing diatribe that has pulled back the curtain on a part of the football culture Goodell wants to eliminate.
After his appeal was heard Thursday, the Saints¡¯ assistant head coach, Joe Vitt, said that Goodell had a tough job. But the Williams tape ¡ª stunning because of the specificity and brutality of the instructions, and the overt references to money being offered ¡ª makes it just a little bit easier. The presence of the man on Park Avenue who held aloft a ¡°Free ¡± sign while Payton¡¯s appeal was being heard Thursday notwithstanding, the tape served as a graphic affirmation that only the most ardent Saints fans, or those who cannot recognize a tipping point, could still think Goodell overreached in his sanctions, particularly within the critical context in which the league now operates.
According to a person briefed on the N.F.L.¡¯s investigation, the league had not heard the audio before Thursday, but it had learned of the speech and its contents during the course of interviews while looking into the bounty scandal. Still, while the sharpness of Williams¡¯s instructions to snap a player¡¯s knee ligament and to repeatedly hit the head of another, shocked even some current and former players like Warren Sapp ¡ª ¡°Come on man, you don¡¯t talk about the game in terms of hurting people,¡± he said ¡ª the tape has resonated most with more casual followers of the game, members of the court of public opinion who might never have set foot in a locker room but who are especially important to the N.F.L. right now.
Goodell¡¯s sanctions have come against the backdrop of lawsuits involving hundreds of former players who claim lingering damage from concussions they sustained during their playing days. The lawsuits are in their earliest stages, and it could be years before they are resolved ¡ª perhaps with the N.F.L. having to pay out hundreds of millions of dollars. During the league¡¯s meetings last week, when one team owner was asked if he thought Goodell had come down too hard on the Saints, he responded bluntly: ¡°With all the concussion stuff? He had to do it.¡±
While some past and present players were critical of the harsh discipline Goodell meted out, it is indisputable that even as he tries to enforce the rules of the N.F.L., his constituency is much larger than the Saints and the 31 other teams. During Goodell¡¯s tenure, the N.F.L. has made a series of moves in an effort to enhance player safety ¡ª the league has cracked down on hits to the head, and it changed the location of kickoffs to reduce the injury risks of plays that are among the game¡¯s most dangerous. But those were incremental steps, and while Goodell might sincerely hope to make the game safer for players, the Saints¡¯ scandal also gave him an opening to deliver a powerful message ¡ª to teams, and to the public that will ultimately decide the game¡¯s fate with a show of its interest ¡ª that the league is trying to change.
¡°The overwhelming issue for people is the health and safety of our game,¡± the Patriots¡¯ owner, Robert K. Kraft, said hours after the Saints discipline was announced. ¡°I think it¡¯s good that every mother in America knows that the N.F.L. is more concerned about the health and welfare and safety of our players. You can¡¯t get around that it¡¯s a physical, tough game, but there is a way to play.¡±
That is a fine line in the N.F.L., and a difficult one to enforce. After the Giants¡¯ victory over the San Francisco 49ers in the N.F.C. championship game, players acknowledged that they knew of the concussion history of the 49ers returner Kyle Williams and that they had wanted to hit him to see how he would respond. Players later said that the intent was not to give Williams another concussion, but merely to see if he would get rattled when hit. The Giants were clearly briefed on the 49ers¡¯ injuries by coaches, a practice that may surprise the sport¡¯s more casual followers.
But the injury report is made public each week, and testing an opponent¡¯s weakness is a routine part of game strategy. If a receiver has a bad ankle, he may be unable to cut, so make him do it. A cornerback with a strained hamstring may be slowed, so make him run. It is why players with one injured ankle will tape both, so that opponents cannot figure out which one is hurt.
That is one side of the line. Gregg Williams was clearly on the other, and the N.F.L. wants to move everyone off that side. In the course of the investigation ¡ª and certainly since the tape surfaced Thursday ¡ª Williams has become a very convenient bogeyman, probably oversimplifying the N.F.L.¡¯s problem. Williams¡¯s hostile language might make him an outlier, but he is almost certainly not a lone wolf among coaches. Former players like Tim Hasselbeck and Ross Tucker both suggested on Twitter that Williams¡¯s speech was closer to standard than shocking.
The N.F.L. said it had talked to other players about the possibility of bounties on other teams, but had found no evidence to suggest that anything like what was happening with the Saints was going on elsewhere.
The bounty rule has been on the books for years. But it took a whistle-blower and an immense amount of evidence, including e-mails and Power Point presentations, for a team to get caught, and receive sanctions. It is fair to wonder if the N.F.L. would rather not find out that other teams offered bounties, which would suggest a systemic issue rather than an isolated one, and to hope that Goodell¡¯s treatment of the Saints scares others into submission, too.
Whether teams and their players are listening now or not, Williams¡¯s speech and Goodell¡¯s final judgment of the Saints will echo into the league¡¯s future, and perhaps into courtrooms, too.
