With ¡¯s season-long suspension for his role in the ¡¯ bounty program starting Monday, the team took the first step toward moving on without him Thursday by naming the assistant head coach Joe Vitt as the interim coach. There is just one problem: Vitt must first serve a six-game suspension for his part in the bounty program.
In making the announcement, General Manager Mickey Loomis said the team would decide once it got to training camp how to proceed while Vitt is suspended ¡ª which will be the same time that Loomis serves his own eight-game suspension.
Payton, Witt and Loomis were suspended for failing to disclose or stop a bounty program administered for three years by the former defensive coordinator Gregg Williams, who has been suspended indefinitely by the N.F.L.
Payton had consulted with Bill Parcells, the former coach of the Giants, the New England Patriots, the Jets and the Dallas Cowboys, about filling in for him, and Parcells had considered the possibility, largely because of his friendship with Payton. But Parcells, who has not coached since 2006, decided to remain retired.
The naming of Vitt, as odd as it seems because of his pending suspension, was not unexpected. He was the de facto head coach when Payton missed a short portion of last season with a knee injury.
Now he will oversee the Saints throughout the off-season and training camp, then return for the seventh game and the rest of the season.
¡°It is important that we keep Sean Payton¡¯s philosophy front and center during this season,¡± Loomis said. ¡°Sean has been the driving force behind the tremendous success our team has enjoyed during the past six years; his leadership will be missed.
¡°We considered a number of great options to handle Payton¡¯s duties both internally and externally, but believe this will provide the most seamless transition for our players and our coaching staff, allowing our offensive and defensive staffs to remain intact with the fewest changes.¡±
Still, the revolving door of coaches is sure to test the Saints. They will probably lean heavily on players like quarterback for leadership, particularly because sanctions against defensive players involved in the bounty program could still be announced.
Brees, though, is unhappy that he and the Saints have not agreed on a long-term contract. He has received the franchise tag but might not report Monday, when voluntary workouts begin.
There was no mention of Brees in the Saints¡¯ statement Thursday.
¡°We are looking forward to the start of the off-season program, the N.F.L. draft, our minicamps and training camp,¡± the Saints¡¯ owner, Tom Benson, said in a statement. ¡°We are looking forward to the start of our season, as I know that all of our fans are, and we are looking forward to competing and winning a championship right here in our own city, in our own stadium this year.¡±
