Coach Paul MacLean is considering putting his three best offensive players, Jason Spezza, Milan Michalek and Daniel Alfredsson, together on one line.
¡°We¡¯re not certain yet if we¡¯re going to start the game that way,¡± MacLean said after Ottawa¡¯s morning skate Saturday in preparation for Game 2 against the Rangers at Madison Square Garden. ¡°We¡¯re looking at that, but it¡¯s also something we can go to during the game that we¡¯re comfortable with.¡±
Michalek led the Senators during the regular season with 35 goals. Spezza scored 34 and Alfredsson had 27. By putting his three top goal scorers on one line, MacLean would be taking a risk. At the Garden, where the Rangers¡¯ coaching staff gets to change its players last as the home team, the Senators¡¯ talented trio would be matched by the top Rangers defensive pair, Dan Girardi and Ryan McDonagh. MacLean would also be putting added pressure on the rest of his forwards.
By going public with his thinking, MacLean may have been sending a message to his team that change would come for Games 3 and 4 in Ottawa next week if the Senators¡¯ play does not improve.
No matter his coach¡¯s motivation, Spezza was excited about the opportunity.
¡°We¡¯ve played together at times this year and we have instant chemistry,¡± Spezza said. ¡°Me and Alfie played a lot of years together and we don¡¯t always play together now to start games, but we do a lot of times throughout games. He¡¯s a real smart player. We read real well off each other. If that¡¯s what we go with, there¡¯s never adjustment needed.¡±
Despite his team¡¯s 4-2 loss in Game 1, Spezza was confident that the Senators will rebound to make it a long series.
¡°We feel like we can play with them,¡± he said. ¡°We felt pretty good at times and then we got away from our game and that¡¯s when they took over. That¡¯s what makes them the best team in the East. The feeling is still optimism. You have to be prepared to lose games to win in the playoffs.¡±
Rangers players avoiding sharing their thoughts on Twitter during the playoffs.
¡°Hopefully it will be a long break,¡± center Brad Richards wrote in the last tweet before his hiatus started earlier in the week.
¡°Thanks for all your support this season,¡± tweeted Brandon Dubinsky. ¡°Hopefully the next tweet will be holding the Stanley Cup.¡±
None of the players would say who invoked the Twitter rule or whether it was mandatory.
¡°It was just suggested by someone from high above,¡± said one player, declining to be specific.
Stepping away from Twitter makes some sense. Distractions are avoided during the playoffs. Extensive interviews are rarely granted. Charitable and promotional appearances are put on hold. The Rangers do not want to be in an awkward position at an important time if a player tweets something about an opponent or league official that he may regret.
On the flip side, Flyers forward Jaromir Jagr chose to open his Twitter account two days before the playoffs. By the end of the week, Jagr had over 55,000 followers and the Flyers had won the opening two games of their first round series against Pittsburgh.
The Rangers, likely at the suggestion of Coach John Tortorella, are playing it safer.
¡°Focusing on playoffs and team goals,¡± tweeted Michael Del Zotto. ¡°Taking a Twitter break. Always appreciate the support from Blueshirt fans.¡±
Henrik Lundqvist and Marian Gaborik are among the other Rangers players on Twitter.
John Tortorella, the Rangers¡¯ coach, is unpredictable in pregame briefings with reporters. Occasionally, usually when it is least expected, Tortorella can be expansive, even thoughtful in his answers about the forthcoming game and the virtues of his players. Often, the news conferences last less than two minutes.
Tortorella was not in a talkative move Saturday morning after the Rangers¡¯ skate at the Garden. Asked where his team needed to be better in Game 2, Tortorella said, ¡°Everywhere.¡±
One reporter, just wanting to be clear, asked if that included in goal, where Henrik Lundqvist was superb in Game 1.
¡°Everywhere,¡± said Tortorella, who easily summarized his pregame thoughts in less than 140 characters.
