It was nothing more than retribution, frontier justice in its simplest form. But in the peculiar context of playoff hockey, what the did at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night was also a stroke of tactical genius.
The Senators rallied late and beat the , 3-2, with a goal from Chris Neil at 1 minute 17 seconds of overtime, tying their opening-round playoff series at one game apiece.
But what stood out in this game was the Senators¡¯ determination to punish one Ranger, Brian Boyle, for what he did to their star defenseman, Erik Karlsson, in Game 1.
They jumped Boyle. They challenged him to fight. Their pursuit of Boyle neutralized a climate that was all about the top-seeded Rangers and their solid Game 1 victory.
Now the increasingly bitter series heads to Ottawa for Game 3 on Monday night, with the eighth-seeded Senators on even terms with the Rangers.
¡°The whole night was a battle,¡± said Neil, a key figure in the game for his scoring touch and his fists. ¡°We achieved what we wanted to. We got back to our style of hockey.¡±
The Senators had vengeance on their minds from the opening face-off. They were out to punish Boyle for grabbing Karlsson in Game 1 and punching him six times in the head.
Boyle is 6 feet 7 inches and 244 pounds, and Karlsson is 6 feet and 180 pounds. Karlsson did not have a chance to hit back, yet both he and Boyle were given roughing penalties. The Senators did not retaliate against Boyle during that game.
It was different Saturday. Coach Paul MacLean sent out several fighters in the starting lineup: Neil, Terry Carkner, Zack Smith and Zenon Konopka, who was playing the first playoff game of his seven-season N.H.L. career. Rangers Coach John Tortorella countered with his main fighters: Mike Rupp, Brandon Prust and Stu Bickel.
It had all the makings of a game-opening brawl, but the Senators fighters left the ice after only 15 seconds, and it was back to hockey, but only briefly.
As it turned out, the Senators were simply waiting for Boyle to step onto the ice. As soon as he did, at 1:51, Carkner leapt on for Ottawa. Boyle hit Smith in the corner, and Carkner piled into Boyle, knocking him down. Then the fighting started.
Carkner sat on top and threw four or five punches at the prone Boyle, who was as defenseless as Karlsson was when Boyle pummeled him in Game 1. A big pileup ensued, and the Rangers¡¯ Brandon Dubinsky tried to get at Carkner to pull him off.
For that, Dubinsky was given a game misconduct. As he was escorted to the dressing room, the infuriated Dubinsky overturned a water bucket.
But Carkner was also given a game misconduct for attacking Boyle, as well as an additional five-minute penalty.
The Rangers missed their chance to make the Senators pay, however. They failed to score during the long power play, managing only two shots on Ottawa goalie Craig Anderson.
It was not finished with Boyle. At 8:17, Neil squared off with him, and the two had a sharp but brief fight.
Was Tortorella surprised that the Senators started a lineup of fighters? ¡°No,¡± Tortorella said. Was he surprised that they were intent on attacking Boyle? ¡°No,¡± he said.
Was MacLean glad to see Carkner, Neil, Konopka and the rest of his team stick up for Karlsson? ¡°I don¡¯t have an opinion on that,¡± MacLean said.
Boyle stood up for himself throughout. He emerged smiling from the pile after being attacked by Carkner. In the fight with Neil, Boyle was the first to drop his gloves.
¡°It might have been that,¡± Boyle said when asked if he was a target because of what he had done to Karlsson. Then he said he would not talk about the events of the first period.
¡°We¡¯re a tight group that won¡¯t back down,¡± he said. ¡°We did a good job today.¡±
At 2:41 of the third period, it looked as if Boyle had written a storybook ending. With the score tied, 1-1, he scored from the high slot while being knocked over. Boyle broke into a wide smile as he sprung up to celebrate.
But the Senators stubbornly battled back. Nick Foligno tied the score with only 4:37 left in regulation when he pounced on a blocked shot in front of the Rangers¡¯ net and poked the loose puck past goalie Hendrik Lundqvist.
And just past a minute into overtime, Smith beat Boyle on a face-off in the Rangers¡¯ end. A few seconds and a couple shots later, Neil backhanded the puck past Lundqvist, and the Senators celebrated.
¡°You never know how a series is going to go; usually the first game is not near as bad as when it gets going and you start playing each other,¡± said Brad Richards, a former Lady Byng Trophy winner who got so caught up in Saturday¡¯s hostilities that he threw a punch at Karlsson and was sent off for roughing.
¡°I¡¯m sure it¡¯s going to get worse,¡± he said.
Slap Shots
The Senators captain Daniel Alfredsson absorbed a blow to the head from the Rangers rookie forward Carl Hagelin at 10:32 of the second period Saturday. Alfredsson left the ice after and did not return. Hagelin was given a five-minute penalty for elbowing and could be subject to supplementary discipline. A hearing is set for Sunday.
