NEWARK ¡ª The elephant in the ¡¯ dressing room lurks near Zach Parise¡¯s locker. Parise has had a terrific season, overcoming knee surgery to score 31 goals and adapting quickly to his new role as the captain. But he still stands to become an unrestricted free agent July 1.
Losing Parise, 27, would be devastating for the Devils, who have been dealing with financial difficulties. Parise has continued to say that he is focused on helping the Devils go deep into the playoffs, if not win the Stanley Cup.
¡°It¡¯s on the side, out of the way,¡± Parise said of the contract issue last week.
His teammates are hoping he will come back. Parise has been a good captain on a team that has reversed its fortunes from a year ago, when the Devils missed the playoffs for the first time since 1996, mostly because he has remained ferociously competitive.
With the grinding, energetic Parise and the powerful, skilled Ilya Kovalchuk on the same line, the Devils, who play Game 2 of their best-of-seven playoff series Sunday against the Panthers in Sunrise, Fla., have a chance to win more than one round. On Friday night, they defeated Florida, 3-2.
¡°I think he¡¯s going to be an important part of this organization moving forward,¡± said goaltender Martin Brodeur, 39, who made his N.H.L. debut when Parise was 7.
On Friday, the Devils¡¯ owner, Jeff Vanderbeek, said, ¡°We¡¯ve been consistent that Zach is our No. 1 priority to get re-signed, and we¡¯re going to do everything we can to get that done.¡±
Parise said last week that he was concerned only with helping the Devils eliminate the Panthers. Advancing past the second round would be a first for Parise, who has played for the Devils for seven years. He has a big emotional investment in trying to make it work here.
He stands to make millions of dollars ¡ª even if he stays in New Jersey ¡ª and has proved his value, especially this season. The Devils would still have Kovalchuk and probably Brodeur as part of their nucleus, but they would be much better off with Parise, too.
¡°He¡¯s someone on the ice who works hard every shift, a guy who never gives up,¡± forward David Clarkson, who scored 30 goals this season, said of Parise. ¡°When he¡¯s on the ice and you¡¯re the next to go, you want to work as hard as he did because he¡¯s your captain.¡±
The previous Devils captain, Jamie Langenbrunner, now with the St. Louis Blues, used to skate on Parise¡¯s line, providing a benchmark for a captain¡¯s deportment. Essentially, a captain should be an inspiration, and Parise is.
¡°He¡¯s got great skills and he¡¯s got a great work ethic, so that¡¯s a pretty good mix,¡± Kovalchuk said. ¡°I¡¯m very excited to play next to him.¡±
Bright, handsome, engaging, self-deprecating, sincere and always available for interviews after games, Parise is a good representative for the Devils. He has also been a liaison between his teammates and their first-year coach, Peter DeBoer.
¡°I talk to him quite a bit,¡± DeBoer said. ¡°We talk on a regular basis. Zach¡¯s not a small-talk guy. When we talk, it¡¯s because he wants to get a message to me or a point across, and vice versa. That¡¯s our relationship.¡±
When asked how Parise had done in his first season as the captain, DeBoer said: ¡°Anybody who knows Zach knows he¡¯s not going to be giving long speeches. He leads by example. He lets his play do the talking.¡±
DeBoer added: ¡°At the same time, I¡¯ve found him very invested in the team, the dressing room, creating a tight group. He was very successful at it. If you ask anyone, they all talk about how they enjoy coming to the rink together. Zach has played a big part in that.¡±
That Parise has rebounded so thoroughly from 17 months ago has given the Devils a lift. A restricted free agent last July, he signed a one-year, $6 million contract with the idea that he could work out a longer deal later.
Besides being able to track down loose pucks, especially those near the opponent¡¯s goal, Parise was loyal to the Devils. He and Kovalchuk have worked well on a line that included the rookie Adam Henrique and now is centered by Parise¡¯s longtime teammate Travis Zajac.
¡°When he does say something, guys listen to him because everyone respects him,¡± Zajac said of Parise. ¡°I don¡¯t think much has changed with him. He¡¯s not going to be a rah-rah guy in the dressing room. His biggest asset is his leadership on the ice. When he goes, this team goes. I think that¡¯s the biggest compliment a player can get.¡±
Parise, chuckling, said: ¡°I¡¯m trying, at least, to do what I¡¯ve always done. You have more meetings with the coach, and they ask you a few things. You definitely have more responsibility. I think you¡¯re looked at a little differently from the outside. But I think it¡¯s gone pretty well.¡±
So far, anyway. The Devils (48-28-6) won 10 more regular-season games than they did last season and made the playoffs with relative ease. But players and coaches like to say a team¡¯s success is determined in the playoffs, so Parise says he has a lot more to do.
Of Parise¡¯s contract status, Zajac said: ¡°We haven¡¯t talked about it much. That¡¯s a decision I¡¯m sure he¡¯ll make later on. But he¡¯s a big part of this organization. Everyone wants him to be a part of this organization, and I think he wants that too. I think his focus right now is having a good playoffs and leading this team to some success in the playoffs.¡±
