NEW ORLEANS ¡ª Few people who fill out tournament brackets and tune in to games on television would recognize Greg Shaheen. His official title with the N.C.A.A. is the interim executive vice president for championships and alliances, a jumble of words that essentially means he runs the N.C.A.A. men¡¯s basketball tournament and the organization¡¯s 88 other championships.
For more than a decade, Shaheen has been indispensable in the men¡¯s tournament, and he is perhaps the most important person behind the N.C.A.A¡¯s most important event. From negotiating television contracts to dealing with coaches to game operations, Shaheen is involved in nearly every aspect of the tournament, which has a contract worth nearly $11 billion and brings in more than 90 percent of the N.C.A.A.¡¯s revenue.
But Shaheen¡¯s name was mentioned in hushed and awkward tones at the Final Four this weekend, because this could be the final time he runs the event. Shaheen¡¯s job was posted publicly in December, and interviews with about a dozen college officials last week revealed that it is unlikely Shaheen will get the interim tag lifted once the tournament concludes or revert to his old job running only the men¡¯s tournament.
¡°It¡¯s hard for me to understand anything anymore except that everyone wants their own power,¡± Michigan State Coach Tom Izzo said. ¡°I don¡¯t know if it¡¯s the way it has to be. This guy has done a lot for college athletics.¡±
The N.C.A.A.¡¯s president, Mark Emmert, sidestepped questions about Shaheen¡¯s future last week, offering answers about ¡°organizational structure¡± and ¡°senior leadership.¡± It was hardly a ringing endorsement.
¡°Leaders of organizations have to evaluate talent and structure and put the best people and structures in place and you work with them,¡± said Emmert, who added he could not comment further because Shaheen is a candidate to have the interim tag lifted from his title.
Shaheen also carefully chose his words.
¡°I¡¯m humbled to be involved with this organization and to be considered for this job,¡± he said.
Normally, the hiring of N.C.A.A. executives is largely ignored. But Shaheen has emerged as one of the most prominent figures in an unpopular organization that values blending in and toeing the company line. He has a comedian¡¯s self-deprecation, a salesman¡¯s gift to engage and a work ethic so prodigious that no fewer than five people interviewed for this article mentioned Shaheen¡¯s returning e-mails at 3 a.m. Shaheen, 44, has never been married and openly refers to himself as a geek who learned early in life to laugh at himself.
In an organization with little personality, Shaheen has emerged as its biggest and boldest. There will most likely be an outcry among college coaches if he is not retained.
Izzo said it ¡°blows me away¡± that Shaheen may not return in some role with the men¡¯s tournament, crediting Shaheen with building relationships among college coaches and the N.C.A.A. Kansas Coach Bill Self agreed.
¡°I can¡¯t imagine anyone doing their job from a coach¡¯s standpoint better than he¡¯s done his,¡± Self said. He added he was ¡°shocked¡± when he heard Shaheen may not return.
Izzo credited Shaheen¡¯s ability to ¡°humanize¡± the N.C.A.A, pointing out that the N.C.A.A. and college basketball coaches need each other. No one has done more to bridge the gap between the two over the past five or six years than Shaheen, who has worked closely with the coaches and Jim Haney, the director of the National Association of Basketball Coaches.
¡°I think people felt like you were talking to a computer there for a while and there was nobody at the other end of the phone,¡± Izzo said of the N.C.A.A..
Numerous people, both with the N.C.A.A. and around college athletics, declined to comment on Shaheen. While many acknowledged Shaheen¡¯s strengths and relentlessness, they described a Shakespearean character whose biggest attribute, his prodigious work ethic, also proved to be a weakness. Shaheen controls many of the N.C.A.A.¡¯s most critical relationships, which range from negotiating the CBS-Turner television contract to his role with sponsors, coaches, advertisers, marketing, game operations and the news media. In many conversations, people said Shaheen had an inability to delegate responsibilities, and others criticized him for not responding to e-mails ¡ª he can receive up to 1,000 in a day ¡ª and phone messages.
