Nearly a month ago, the owners of the avoided a jury trial by agreeing to pay $162 million to the trustee for the victims of ¡¯s fraud.
More than a year of acrimony ended the day the trial was supposed to begin. the trustee, , dropped his central claim: that the Mets¡¯ owners, and , willfully ignored warnings about Madoff during their years of investing with him.
On Friday night, Picard revealed ¡ª with some hindsight and a look at financial information provided since the settlement by Wilpon and Katz ¡ª that it would have been difficult to quickly recover more than $162 million.
In a court filing, Picard wrote that ¡°the defendants¡¯ cash flow and lender covenants would not have enabled me to recover more¡± if he had won at trial.
Picard did not offer any details of Wilpon and Katz¡¯s finances, but the implication is that they were hamstrung by loans and did not have enough money on hand to pay as much as $303 million, the maximum payment they faced if they lost at trial.
Wilpon and Katz may not have to pay any part of the $162 million in so-called fictitious profits that they received from Madoff accounts described as net winners by Picard. But other accounts were net losers, entitling the owners to be reimbursed for $178 million from Picard¡¯s cash recoveries. That is to be applied to pay the settlement. The more Picard recovers ¡ª the figure is currently at $9 billion ¡ª the less Wilpon and Katz pay.
In another filing, Picard described the pragmatic method behind recovering the money. ¡°With the collectability of a favorable judgment in doubt,¡± Picard said, he found a way to recover money from Wilpon and Katz that is not based wholly on their financial resources, ¡°but rather on the trustee¡¯s own ability to maximize¡± the size of the fund that is being used to pay Madoff¡¯s defrauded customers.
If Picard¡¯s recoveries do not yield $162 million after three years, Wilpon and Katz have guaranteed that they will pay as much as $29 million.
Picard did not say which documents he examined in Wilpon and Katz¡¯s business empire, which includes real estate, a hedge fund and other investments.
The Mets, the most public of their holdings, have been under a financial strain. They lost $121 million the last two seasons, have had attendance tumble at Citi Field, needed loans from Major League Baseball and Bank of America to help their sagging finances, and slashed their player payroll this season by $50 million.
The settlement gave them financial relief, as did $240 million raised by selling limited shares in the team. The proceeds were used to repay the M.L.B. and Bank of America loans and some of the team¡¯s other debt, as much as $400 million, with other banks.
