LONDON ¡ª Mario Balotelli is what he is. His talent can win games at the highest level. His temperament can destroy him, and, worse, he stands accused of contaminating the team around him.
At 21, he is close to self-ruin.
But Balotelli is not the only reason why Manchester City is falling short in its attempt to displace its neighbor, , as England¡¯s top club.
Both teams play every three or four days now, and United has taken the lead that City held for two-thirds of the season. And as Balotelli thrashes around, petulantly kicking opponents in frustration, he becomes the wretched image of City¡¯s failings.
After his latest outburst, the troubled Italian might have played his last game of this season ¡ª and possibly the last he will ever play if City decides to sell him. When the Football Association reviews the video of his atrocious foul Sunday ¡ª a kick that could have snapped the bones of his Arsenal opponent ¡ª Balotelli should expect to be banned for the remaining six games that City has left in the Premier League.
It was a shocking use of force. Arsenal¡¯s Alex Song was lucky indeed that his right leg was not firmly planted on the ground when Balotelli¡¯s foot slammed into him.
However, Balotelli must not become the scapegoat, or the excuse, for City¡¯s blowing its chance to win the top league for the first time since 1968.
Nobody has scored more goals for the team since the New Year than Balotelli. And others at the club, from the coach Roberto Mancini on down, have lacked the maturity, the know-how or the stamina to keep up the consistency that lets United win more at the end of seasons than anyone else in the league.
It is about timing and management. United¡¯s manager, Alex Ferguson, has been doing this for 25 years and holds his nerve, and his players¡¯ nerves, in check better than anyone else in England.
Ferguson has his own explosive, sometimes recalcitrant, catalyst among his group of players: Wayne Rooney. Rooney, and his agent, threatened to quit United last season unless the club met his salary demands and signed new players. Ferguson faced them down. He gave Rooney a new contract, but told him very publicly that only one man, the manager, decides who signs and who plays for Manchester United.
If United is bearing down on its 13th Premier League title in 20 years, it is because Ferguson knows how to pace his squad through the marathon of a league season. It because he, not any single player, holds the knowledge of how to give rein to the talents at his disposal.
Arguably, the coup this season by Ferguson was to persuade Paul Scholes, the best passer in England, to come out of retirement at the turn of the year. With Scholes back in midfield, Rooney knows that wherever he runs, the ball has a better chance of finding him.
With Antonio Valencia restored after a badly broken ankle, United has fresh impetus on the wing.
With more defenders fit after a glut of injuries last fall, and with the goalie David De Gea now acclimatized to the physicality of English soccer, the team has come together as a whole at the right time.
City has gone the other way. Long before Balotelli was the problem ¡ª the excuse ¡ª there was that volatile night in Munich when Mancini had a public falling out with Carlos T¨¦vez.
The coach ordered the brooding Carlos T¨¦vez, captain of City last season, to prepare to come off the bench in a Champions League match. Carlos T¨¦vez either did not understand the instruction, or refused it.
Mancini seethed. He said Carlos T¨¦vez would never play for City again while he was coach. The Abu Dhabi owners of City supported the coach, who in England has a broader remit to decide whom the club buys and discards.
Those owners have backed Mancini, and no other English club has recruited more players for more money in such a short time. To be sure, there have been other big importers of talents: United, over the past 25 years; Chelsea, under the ownership of Roman Abramovich; and to a lesser, but still very expensive, degree, Arsenal, Liverpool and Tottenham. But no one has spent the way City has recently.
When not one but two maverick players, T¨¦vez and Balotelli, harm the team ethic, the judgment of the manager/coach has to be brought into question.
Even that oversimplifies the problems that have unraveled City over the past two months.
Yaya Tour¨¦ was an immense force, a striding giant in the midfield for the first half of the season. Then he went to the African Cup of Nations for his country, Ivory Coast. After five long, hot weeks in a tournament that the Ivorians ultimately lost in the final, Tour¨¦ returned.
He has not exactly been a shadow of himself, but he has looked diminished and tired.
In his absence, the key midfielder was David Silva, the creative spark to much of City¡¯s early-season domination. But Silva, too, has run into the mental and physical wall of playing too much, too often, over too long a campaign.
A third, pivotal man in the team, Vincent Kompany, was injured after the New Year. His influence on defense and his leadership ¡ª he soothed the anxieties of all around him ¡ª proved irreplaceable, especially because the logical replacement, Yaya¡¯s brother Kolo Tour¨¦, was also at the African Cup.
All the skilled players ¡ª the reserves as well as the recognized starters bought in at Mancini¡¯s request ¡ª still have not shaken United from its perch. And this has not been a vintage Manchester United squad, merely one that combines the best of its youth with the know-how of older players who have been there and done that and held Ferguson¡¯s credo strong.
More valuable than talent is trust. United¡¯s players, and their manager, are in it together. Mancini has admitted he cannot trust Balotelli, and clearly he did not trust T¨¦vez.
