When Mets pitcher R. A. Dickey in his right foot last May, he turned to a treatment that in recent years has become a go-to elixir for professional baseball and football players: Toradol, an injectable anti-inflammatory drug.
¡°It certainly helped, especially in the first months after the injury,¡± said Dickey, who received injections in his buttocks before about 12 starts. ¡°I don¡¯t think it¡¯s a panacea, but it helps you get where you have to go.¡±
But some medical experts are concerned about the ways sports teams are using Toradol because so little is known about its possible long-term effects on athletes.
No data are available on the use of the drug by athletes, so it is unclear how frequently Toradol injections are provided and for what ailments, and whether players are told of the potential side effects ¡ª all of which has caused tension and a growing awareness among sports medicine experts. Concerns over its widespread use in baseball compelled at least two team doctors to stop using it, according to a medical staff member of a major league team who spoke on condition of anonymity so as not to implicate his team.
¡°It puts those of us who do sports medicine in a tough position,¡± said Dr. Jessica F. Butts, a physician focused on family and sports medicine at Indiana University Health. ¡°The decision to play is a tough one. There are some things that are black and white, but there are a lot of sports injuries that are in a gray zone, especially in professional sports and college sports, where so much is on the line.¡±
Dr. Gary Green, the medical director for Major League Baseball, said discussions about Toradol came up every year and ¡°there¡¯s certainly differences among physicians about how it¡¯s administered.¡± But, he said, ¡°it¡¯s not a controversy, but a difference of opinions.¡± The drug has ¡°a good analgesic impact,¡± he said, and the side effects are well known.
, is among a family of drugs called nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Doctors put it in the same class as ibuprofen (like Advil) and . But unlike those drugs, Toradol can be injected, as well as taken orally, and can act more quickly. It is most commonly used in emergency rooms and post-operation wards to help patients manage short-term inflammation and pain, but athletes are turning to it to deal with inflammation and pain.
The use of Toradol, which is made by a number of drug manufacturers, was at the by a dozen retired N.F.L. players who said the league and its teams repeatedly and indiscriminately administered the drug before and during games, thus worsening injuries like concussions. (The league disputed the claims.)
The suit claimed that the use of Toradol was rampant in the N.F.L., with players lining up in their locker rooms before games to receive injections, a process the players called a cattle call. According to the complaint, no warnings were given and there was ¡°no distinguishing between different medical conditions of the players, and regardless of whether the player had an injury of any kind.¡±
Dr. Scott Rodeo, the associate team physician of the New York Giants, said that in the National Football League, Toradol ¡°became prevalent to the point where players expected it and used it prophylactically.¡± Some players, he said, ¡°barely think of them as medicine.¡±
Dr. Rodeo said Toradol first surfaced in football locker rooms in the mid-1990s. He said he was aware of the side effects, including how the drug could lead to increased bleeding, as well as gastrointestinal damage. There is also an ever-present risk of infection from an injection.
But when the drug is given occasionally to young, healthy players, the risks appear to be low, he said, adding that up to 40 percent of the Giants players received a shot on game days.
Dr. Rodeo and other doctors noted the risks associated with cumulative doses of Toradol, like kidney damage, one reason some doctors are curtailing its use. Others want to avoid a slippery slope, in which a player who uses Toradol on game days asks for additional shots after the game or on practice days. Many sports leagues largely let team physicians decide how and when to prescribe the drug, which leaves an opportunity for misuse.
