The glow emanating from the ¡¯ home opener Friday quickly dimmed Saturday. The exacted their revenge on , whose second sloppy start revived questions about his place in the rotation.
One day after being shut out by Hiroki Kuroda, the Angels fired back with six runs against Hughes, who was knocked out in the fourth inning having allowed two home runs among the eight hits he yielded. Before it was over the Angels would tack on another run for a win at Yankee Stadium that halted the Yankees¡¯ winning streak at four games.
Howie Kendrick had three hits off Hughes, including a three-run homer in the fourth that landed in the second deck in left field. The blast signaled the end of a disappointing day for both Hughes and many of the 46,829 in attendance, many of whom booed him as he left the mound.
Hughes had an impressive spring but his two ineffective outings, coupled with a poor season last year that included time on the disabled list with shoulder tendinitis, are already raising questions about his long-term viability. Manager Joe Girardi, however, bristled at suggestions that Hughes was in danger of losing his starting spot after only two outings.
¡°It¡¯s April 14 and we¡¯re talking about our rotation and we¡¯re 4-4?¡± he said. ¡°We¡¯re not 0-8. People are kind of getting a little bit ahead of themselves.¡±
But the questions were not posed in a vacuum. With continuing to build arm strength in the minor leagues, and Michael Pineda (left shoulder tendinitis) expected back next month, one or two Yankees starters could lose spots in the rotation. Hughes was not the most likely candidate coming into the season and still may not be. But he did nothing to help his cause Saturday.
He allowed six earned runs in three and a third innings, walking two and striking out six. In his previous start last Sunday against Tampa Bay, Hughes held the Rays to two runs in four and two-thirds innings. That was not a good game for Hughes, who ran his pitch count to 99. But that start was not as bad as this one.
Hughes also surrendered a two-run homer in the second inning to Chris Iannetta, who tucked a looping drive into the right-field corner.
¡°I felt my stuff was pretty good,¡± Hughes said. ¡°But I wasn¡¯t locating, and there were a couple that hurt me really bad.¡±
But Hughes was not the only one at fault. The meat of the Yankees¡¯ batting order ¡ª Robinson Cano, Alex Rodriguez, Mark Teixeira and Curtis Granderson ¡ª went 2 for 15 for the day, and the Yankees over all were only 1 for 11 with runners in scoring position. Cano, Rodriguez, Teixeira and Granderson continued their early-season struggles, and not one of them is hitting above .229.
Most of the Yankees¡¯ difficulty came against Angels starter C. J. Wilson, who held them to one run and six singles in six innings. But the Yankees could not manage an extra-base hit, even after Wilson left. Again, Girardi pointed to the calendar.
¡°It¡¯s a long season,¡± he said. ¡°Guys might have 32 at-bats, and end up with 600, so you can¡¯t make too much of 32 at-bats.¡±
The only Yankee who had a particularly good day was the rookie David Phelps. Despite allowing the first hit and the first run of his career on Vernon Wells¡¯s home run in the fifth, Phelps was impressive over five and a third innings. He allowed only that hit and two walks while striking out four.
Phelps was particularly pleased to retire one of his childhood heroes, Albert Pujols, three times. ¡°I¡¯ve been rooting for him as long as I can remember,¡± said Phelps, a St. Louis native and Cardinals fan. ¡°I thought it would be interesting to face him. It was cool to get out there and do it.¡±
Phelps could one day be a candidate for the starting rotation. But for now the Yankees¡¯ immediate concerns revolve around getting Hughes back to the form that led him to 18 wins in 2010. For now his rotation spot is safe, at least until Pettitte or Pineda returns. But some fans seemed far less patient about Hughes than the Yankees are.
In the meantime, Hughes will attempt to fix his control problems, and look for moral support wherever he can find it.
¡°I can call my dad,¡± he said. ¡°He never boos me.¡±
INSIDE PITCH
Vernon Wells¡¯s solo home run off Yankees relief pitcher David Phelps was the 250th of his career. Before that, Phelps had retired the first 13 batters he had faced. According to the Elias Sport Bureau, it is the longest such streak by a Yankee beginning his major league career in 50 years.
