Once every generation or so, everything falls into place and allows a team outside one of college football¡¯s traditional powers to compete for a national title. For the Arkansas Razorbacks, the 2012 football season appeared to be shaping up that way. Quarterback Tyler Wilson, a Heisman candidate, returns for his senior year, eight defensive starters are back and two Southeastern Conference West giants, Alabama and L.S.U., will each play in Fayetteville next season.
But this golden opportunity could be doomed before it even begins. On Tuesday night, the university fired Coach Bobby Petrino in the wake of an embarrassing scandal that began with Petrino¡¯s getting into a motorcycle accident last week.
In a statement, Petrino said: ¡°I¡¯m sorry. These two words seem very inadequate. But that is my heart. All I have been able to think about is the number of people I¡¯ve let down by making selfish decisions. I¡¯ve taken a lot of criticism in the past. Some deserved, some not deserved. This time, I have no one to blame but myself.¡±
Arkansas Athletic Director Jeff Long, in an emotional news conference in which he twice choked back tears, said that Petrino¡¯s ¡°pattern of misleading and manipulative behavior¡± had led to his firing.
Long was referring to Petrino¡¯s initial claim that he was riding alone on his motorcycle at the time of the accident. Just before the police report became public, Petrino admitted that he had a passenger. It turned out to be Jessica Dorrell, a 25-year-old woman who is a former Arkansas volleyball player and with whom Petrino admitted having an inappropriate relationship. Petrino, who is married with four children, had also recently hired Dorrell for a football department staff position for which 159 candidates had applied.
Long also said that his investigation into the incident found that Petrino had given Dorrell $20,000 in cash. Ultimately, Long said that it was not the inappropriate relationship with Dorrell that led to Petrino¡¯s firing, but his duplicity surrounding the details of the accident and his failure to disclose his relationship with Dorrell before she was hired.
Long said that he discovered in his investigation that the relationship had been going on for a ¡°significant period of time.¡± He added that Dorrell was still an employee of Arkansas.
¡°In this case, Coach Petrino abused his authority when he made a staff hire that benefited himself and jeopardized the integrity of the football program,¡± Long said.
The Razorbacks went 11-2 last season, and the returning talent, combined with a favorable schedule, created larger-than-life expectations in Fayetteville.
Petrino, 51, had been placed on paid administrative leave last Thursday. Petrino¡¯s contract, which was extended through 2017, paid him about $3.5 million a year. Because the university fired him with cause, it does not plan to pay him.
The interim coach Taver Johnson will remain in that role through spring practice. It is unlikely that a permanent coach will come from the Razorbacks¡¯ program, although Long said he would consider that option. Petrino¡¯s brother, Paul, is the team¡¯s offensive coordinator and appears to be staying with the program for spring practice.
Nebraska¡¯s Bo Pelini, Iowa State¡¯s Paul Rhoads, Baylor¡¯s Art Briles and Texas Christian¡¯s Gary Patterson could be among the university¡¯s top targets. Candidates with in-state ties are the former Arkansas assistants Garrick McGee and Gus Malzahn. ?
What makes the job attractive is the chance for immediate success. Along with Wilson returning, the star tailback Knile Davis is back from a serious ankle injury and the Razorbacks¡¯ defense has the potential to complement the team¡¯s productive offense.
Petrino¡¯s on-field success and the university¡¯s decision not to immediately fire him made it appear for a few days that it might overlook Petrino¡¯s off-field transgressions. Long denied that he offered Petrino chances to stay, saying there was no negotiation in which he could remain the coach.
For Petrino, the firing amid a scandal continues a trend of his failing to exit gracefully.
When he was the coach at Louisville, Petrino interviewed for the Auburn job held by Tommy Tuberville, who had given him his big break by hiring him as the offensive coordinator. Petrino had no problem interviewing for Tuberville¡¯s job before Tuberville lost it.
Petrino left Louisville to coach the Atlanta Falcons, and with three games left in his first season in 2007, he earned scorn in N.F.L. circles and among his players when he bolted for Arkansas.
DeAngelo Hall, a former Falcons defensive back, said last weekend: ?¡°Trouble always follows him, and it¡¯s mostly by the decisions he¡¯s made. He¡¯s a clown. I have a 10-year old son and I would never, ever send him to a college to play for a coach or a person like Petrino.¡±
