
Every spring, the first warm day has brought an itch to get out my glove and bat and recover the skills I had as a boy ¡ª especially the ability to clout the ball deep into the outfield.
Somehow, after Little League, I lost my swing. As a scrawny 10-year-old in 1964, I used to send my father¡¯s pitches flying to a few feet from the center-field fence. But for decades, in batting cages or at softball games, my at-bats produced only feeble grounders. My muscles seemed to have forgotten what they once knew.
This year, I resolved to learn how to hit again. Call it a midlife crisis, or perhaps a midcourse correction, but it was now or never. Another season, and my reconstructed knees might give out altogether. My goal was to step into a batting cage and smack line drive after line drive off pitches coming at 65 miles per hour.
My first stop was the library. I took out ¡°,¡± by Ted Williams, and ¡°.¡± From these books, and from far too many Web sites, I compiled step-by-step instructions.
The experts, I discovered, contradict one another. Use a level swing if you¡¯re a beginner. (And I guess I am, although I first swung a bat 50 years ago.) Swing up, slightly, to meet the ball head-on, because the pitcher is standing on a mound. Swing down to generate backspin, which gives lift. The more you use your hips, the more power you¡¯ll generate. Forget your hips, just throw your hands at the ball. Keep your elbows close to your body for a more compact swing. Extend your lead arm fully from the elbow, like a karate chop.
There are two competing methods of hitting, I learned: rotational and linear. Rotational hitters draw their power from turning their hips; linear hitters bring their hands straight to the ball and shift their weight from back to front.
Though confused by the disagreement and perplexed by its ferocity, I used as many of the tips as I could. It was January, and I took my first practice swings in the basement. Peering with both eyes at the electrical outlet across the room (you see the ball better with two eyes than one, Albert Pujols says), I followed the steps on my crib sheet.
? Line up your knocking knuckles.
? Weight on the balls of your feet, as if landing from a jump.
? Slight weight shift back, then a small stride forward ¡ª feel the momentum move from back to front.
? The bat follows the turning of the hips; turn the torso quickly so the bat turns quickly, too.
? Meet the ball in front, where bat speed is at its maximum.
? Follow through.
The weight shift, it turned out, was the exact movement I had learned as a kid. The hip turn, on the other hand, was new and hard to put together with everything else.
Studying my notes, I spotted that tip about keeping your elbows close to your body. The concept was familiar from tennis ¡ª you lose power if you stretch your arm out when hitting ¡ª and I could feel the difference. Turn this into a habit, I scribbled.
My son shot video of my swings, and we watched my mistakes together. The key problem: near the end of the swing, the bat left its natural path and finished below my chest because my right arm would not stretch any farther. Williams, Joe DiMaggio and Mickey Mantle finished with both hands on the bat, but many major league hitters now follow Lau¡¯s method and release the top hand after contact, letting the bat complete its trajectory unrestricted.
Again and again, I tried and failed to unclench my top hand at the end of the swing. Charley Lau Jr. (son of the legendary batting coach) suggested a training drill to loosen this death grip: instead of clutching the bat, rest the top hand open against the handle. As the swing ends, the bat naturally leaves the hand behind. Voil¨¤, you are Alex Rodriguez!
Remembering the pain of a metal bat vibrating in my hands, I bought batting gloves, and their soft leather palms gave me a much surer grip than I had ever had.
