WELLINGTON ¡ª When Super Rugby introduced the white card this season, the goal was simple: to give officials a chance to review later incidents the referee had missed or on which the referee was unsure whether a red card should have been issued. It would let officials review plays after the match, and that, it was hoped. would result in cleaner play throughout the season.
But now Super Rugby is facing some tough questions as it tests the new system: What happens when a team alleges that an opposing player did one of the most egregious fouls in the sport, eye gouging, but does not offer evidence after the match to back it up? And what happens if there is no video of the allegation that would either clear the accused player or find him guilty, leaving him in a Catch-22?
In two instances last weekend in a match in Pretoria between the Bulls and Crusaders ¡ª just before and after halftime ¡ª the Bulls players Chiliboy Ralepelle and Flip van der Merwe complained to referee Jaco Peyper that they had been eye-gouged by the Crusaders.
Eye-gouging is regarded as one of the worst acts in a rugby match and usually brings a heavy ban at every level of the sport. Under rules by Sanzar, the body that governs Super Rugby, the starting penalty is a 12-week suspension.
Peyper produced the white card in both instances, ensuring that both claims would be reviewed later by a citing commissioner, Freek Burger.
But in both cases no video evidence could be found to prove or disprove the allegations. That left the Bulls open to the accusation that they had made false claims, and it left Crusaders players carrying the stigma of being eye-gougers. And because of the serious allegations, it also meant the Crusaders might come under closer scrutiny than usual from officials in future matches.
Since the match, it has also emerged that the Bulls did not provide any further evidence to back up their claims, even when they were approached by officials after the game.
Normally when a player has been eye-gouged, there is visible evidence of injury to or around the eye, but the Bulls did not offer evidence of that.
The whole issue has left Crusaders coach Todd Blackadder angry, and he has questioned whether the allegations were just a ploy to unsettle his team and to ensure that referees would scrutinize his players much more closely than normal in upcoming matches.
The white card, which was added to the usual yellow and red card on a trial basis this season, has been used regularly throughout the first seven weeks of the season to add another layer of scrutiny to potential incidents of illegal, dangerous and foul play.
The white card can be used in two ways: when a referee believes foul or illegal play has occurred, but he is unclear whether a red card is warranted or he has been unable to identify the player involved; or when a player makes a complaint to the referee about an incident that the official did not see. The white card can be shown in addition to a yellow card during play, and it can be shown when a penalty is awarded.
In all cases, a citing commissioner will later view the video footage and decide if further action needs to be taken, such as an off-field yellow card or an appearance before a disciplinary officer.
In some white-card cases this season, players have been received off-field yellow cards after the matches, but in other cases the citing commissioner reviewing the incident have deemed no further action or punishment is needed.
But no outcome has brought the furor or ill-feeling that these eye-gouging allegations have.
Blackadder, who has wondered if the system will be abused, demanded an apology from the Bulls for besmirching his team¡¯s integrity. The Bulls refused to apologize, and in a statement said they backed their players.
¡°The rules are clear and we applied them 100 percent correctly. We had the right to raise the matter with the referee and we accept the fact that there was no video evidence,¡± said the Bulls¡¯ high performance and media manager, Ian Schwartz.
