DENVER ¡ª At the buzzer, threw a towel in the air, ran to midcourt and held up a finger signaling that Baylor was finally No. 1. With another dominant performance, she made good on a pledge to lift a national championship trophy and to hoist her coach to cut down the nets.
Undefeated on Tuesday, becoming the first N.C.A.A. basketball team to win 40 games in a season. Victory brought a shower of confetti on the court and a cascading validation for the 6-foot-8 Griner, who has developed into perhaps the greatest player of this or any other season of women¡¯s college basketball.
¡°Brittney Griner may go down in history as the most dominant post player, especially on the defensive end,¡± said Baylor Coach Kim Mulkey, who won her second N.C.A.A. title since 2005.
On Tuesday, Griner delivered 26 points, 13 rebounds and 5 blocked shots, hitting 8 of her 9 shots in the decisive second half. With a title came a Rushmorean legitimacy, confirmation that Griner in her junior season had joined Nancy Lieberman, Cheryl Miller, Chamique Holdsclaw, Diana Taurasi and Candace Parker as the college game¡¯s greats.
Certainly, Griner is the most disruptive player ever at the defensive end, with a wingspan that stretches to 7-4. On Tuesday, she bothered many more shots than she blocked. Notre Dame (35-4) missed 40 of its 62 field-goal attempts and settled for being the national runner-up a second consecutive season.
¡°The national championship, I wanted it because this is what our team wanted, and what we promised Coach when we got here,¡± Griner said. ¡°It had nothing to do with validating what type of player I am. That was the last thing in the back of my mind.¡±
She summoned all of her splendid mobility and resourceful shooting in the second half against Notre Dame. She leaned inside for a basket, drove for another, spun around two defenders on the baseline, feathered a jump hook, and caught an inbounds pass and vaulted over three opponents.
It has been said repeatedly that Griner has changed women¡¯s college basketball. That is true, to a point. The game will be altered as long as she remains at Baylor. But this is sport, not the auto industry. There no other 6-8 models with Griner¡¯s skills on the assembly line.
With a businesslike dunk early in the tournament against Florida, and a breakaway, two-handed rim-hanger against Georgia Tech, Griner emphatically rebutted the contention by those who would dismiss women¡¯s basketball that it is unworthy because it is played below the rim.
¡°I think that the dunk in some ways has been used against women, that the women¡¯s game is somehow inferior because women don¡¯t dunk on a regular basis,¡± Stanford Coach Tara VanDerveer said. ¡°But she gets right out there and dunks off an inbounds pass or dunks in transition.¡±
Notre Dame tried to surround Griner in a zone defense, but it worked only briefly. Devereaux Peters, the Irish forward assigned to Griner, drew three fouls before halftime.
After trailing by 9-8, Baylor moved ahead to stay with a 12-1 run. Griner blocked a reckless drive by Notre Dame guard Kayla McBride, dropped in a layup, grabbed an offensive rebound and hit a follow shot as the Bears went up by 20-10.
¡°I think she¡¯s one of a kind,¡± Notre Dame Coach Muffet McGraw said of Griner¡¯s moves in the post. ¡°She¡¯s like a guy playing with women.¡±
After the propriety of McGraw¡¯s remark was questioned on social media, the Notre Dame coach issued a statement saying she was referring to Griner¡¯s style of play and dominance.
¡°Any attempt by others to read anything more into that comment is wrong, malicious and incredibly insulting to Brittney, Kim (Mulkey) and the Baylor women¡¯s basketball program, and it¡¯s a poor attempt by some to try and take away from what was a well-played national championship game,¡± McGraw said. ¡°I have held, and continue to hold Brittney and the Baylor women¡¯s basketball in the highest regard and I congratulate them on winning the title this evening.¡±
