Beginning Tuesday, teams and fans will converge on Madison Square Garden for the 32nd Big East Conference men¡¯s basketball tournament. Since the conference began using the Garden for its annual carnival in 1983, the tournament has become a popular launching pad for March Madness.
Last year, a record 11 men¡¯s teams were invited from the Big East to the N.C.A.A. tournament, and Connecticut went on to win the national title.
But this year¡¯s tournament takes place amid volatile conference shifts that make a mockery of geography and threaten the conference¡¯s integrity and possibly its very survival.
The Big East was formed as a basketball-only conference in 1979, and it had a great Plan A.
Plan A was Dave Gavitt¡¯s dream of creating a superconference on the East Coast ¡ª Philadelphia, New York, Boston and Washington?¡ª that would dominate college basketball.
Gavitt¡¯s dream became the Big East and the Big East tournament, which continues to sell out the Garden 29 years later. There was no Plan B ¡ª? rather, no Plan F, for football. Now the conference is paying the price for ignoring the implications of not having big-time football in its portfolio. The conference has become a bad-luck ship, losing crew members and passengers left and right.
Miami left, Boston College left. West Virginia is leaving, Pittsburgh is leaving. The most crushing blow of all is that Syracuse is leaving. West Virginia will play in the Big 12, Pitt and Syracuse in the Atlantic Coast Conference.
No conference has played better basketball than the Big East; other conferences have played college basketball longer, but none better. In 1985, the Big East had three teams reach the Final Four, and two played for the national championship, with Villanova winning the title.
Success invariably breeds overconfidence. This may be why the Big East founders were so opposed to having Plan B. Who needed Plan B when Plan A was working so fabulously? They did not contemplate a situation in which the Big East would be scrambling, in which basketball wouldn¡¯t be enough to sustain the conference.
¡°I think that people for the most part didn¡¯t understand how big and important football was,¡± the former Big East commissioner Mike Tranghese said in a recent interview. ¡°It really drove the cart.¡±
If the architects of the conference had known then what they know now, what would they have done differently?
Tranghese said: ¡°In hindsight, you say the league had 20-something pretty good years when you look at it, but now with what¡¯s going on ¡ª you look at it in hindsight, I think the question is pretty interesting. I don¡¯t know how to answer it.¡±
?For all of the league¡¯s success, it now realizes, perhaps too late, that football is king. No matter how many cheering fans, no matter how many teams are invited to the N.C.A.A. tournament, without a hefty television contract for football, the Big East will fall from the ranks of the 1 percent of the college sports elite.
Tranghese tried to tell the Big East¡¯s university presidents and athletic directors as much as early as 1989 when he was Gavitt¡¯s assistant. Gavitt thought the conference needed to bring Penn State into the fold. Penn State was an independent at the time, looking for the security of a conference.
The membership voted no, with St. John¡¯s, Villanova and Georgetown leading the resistance. At the end of the meeting, Gavitt asked Tranghese what he thought about the decision. ¡°I said, ¡®We will all rue the day about this decision,¡¯?¡± Tranghese said. ¡°I understood how big football was. I didn¡¯t understand how big it was going to become.
¡°At that point, the Big East had so much success in the ¡¯80s, everybody sort of forgot about it.? But I felt looking back on the history of the Big East, that was probably the biggest mistake we made.¡±
