MANAMA, BAHRAIN ¡ª ¡°Unif1ed: One nation in celebration¡± is the slogan of the Bahrain Grand Prix, scheduled to take place April 22.
But unity has been difficult to achieve in this Gulf kingdom, which has been split apart by a year-long protest seeking greater political freedom for Shiites.
After the race was canceled last year because of the clashes between protesters and the police and concerns about safety and security, the government has been eager to showcase the event this year as a symbol of tranquility.
But turmoil, particularly outside the capital of Manama, has persisted and doubts about whether the race this year would take place have dogged preparations. Protests flared Friday as several thousand Bahrainis marched after an announcement that the race would take place. ¡°Down with Hamad!¡± chanted some marchers, referring to King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, Reuters reported. Several other rallies were planned.
Anti-government groups have protested against the race taking place this year. ¡°It would be the wrong message to the regime,¡± said Farida Ghulam Ismail, a member of the opposition whose husband, Ibrahim Sharif, is in jail. ¡°People are still in jail for demanding more rights in this country and there is extensive use of tear gas against protesters.¡±
Zainab al-Khawaja, daughter of Abdelhadi al-Khawaja, who has been on a for 65 days, said in an interview for the German news magazine Der Spiegel that protesters would persist in their demands even if the race took place. ¡°How can a country heal if it¡¯s still bleeding?¡± she asked. ¡°The government is not doing anything for the country to heal. The government is just making cosmetic changes.¡±
Khawaja¡¯s father, who is Bahraini and Danish, was sentenced to life in prison on anti-state crimes last year as the kingdom imposed martial law to quell political unrest.
Seven Bahraini police officers were wounded Monday, three of them seriously, when a home-made bomb exploded. On Wednesday, a mob armed with iron rods and sticks ransacked a supermarket belonging to a Shiite-owned business group in retaliation for the bombing
In the street battles that have continued for more than a year, nearly 50 people have died.
Some insist that there is little to worry about regarding Bahrain and the race. John Yates, a former assistant commissioner of the Metropolitan police in London who have been hired to oversee an overhaul of the Bahrain police force, said that he felt safe in the kingdom. ¡°Indeed, safer than I have often felt in London,¡± he said Wednesday, according to Reuters.
During an interview, Yates said that tear gas was the only weapon the riot police carried. ¡°They don¡¯t carry any guns, while protesters in the villages are throwing Molotov cocktails and stones,¡± he said.
¡°Some people have recently told stories to media that never took place and give the impression that Bahrain is a war zone, and it¡¯s not,¡± Yates said.
The boss of , Bernie Ecclestone, said Friday in Shanghai, where he was overseeing preparations for the Chinese Grand Prix on Sunday, that the Bahrain race was definitely going ahead as planned and that all of the teams were ¡°happy¡± to be going there, The Associated Press reported.
¡°There¡¯s nothing happening,¡± Ecclestone said of the situation in Bahrain. ¡°I know people that live there and it¡¯s all very quiet and peaceful.¡±
The race has its supporters in Bahrain. ¡°I really hope the race will take place this year,¡± said Ebrahim Nusaif, 36. A professional volleyball player who is a Shiite with four young children, Nusaif also was a racetrack organizer who lost his job because he went to the heart of the protests ¡ª the Pearl Roundabout ¡ª last year during working hours, to see, in his words, ¡°what was going on.¡±
¡°I think it would help our nation to heal. This is sports, not politics,¡± he said, referring to the discussions on whether the Formula One race should take place.
