HUNTINGDON, Tenn. ¡ª It was early on a Friday morning, and there was an emergency in Carroll Academy¡¯s Room 5. A student named Destiny was sitting alone, crying. With cameras in every classroom, she could be seen on the monitor in the security office.
The girls basketball team at had lost the night before, 69-9, at home to , a private college-preparatory school about 45 minutes away.
Destiny, a 17-year-old senior with a crossover dribble, a silky shooting touch and a habit of drug use, was the only one of the nine Carroll Academy players with any previous high school basketball experience. There were games this season when Destiny scored all the team¡¯s points. There were times in every game when her passes, delivered at the velocity of someone playing dodge ball, bounced off teammates¡¯ hands, leaving Destiny in a quiet fit of grimaces and upturned palms.
On the court the previous night, her street-tough persona boiled toward reckless anger. Defended tightly, often by two opponents, she was all elbows and sneers.
Coach Tonya Lutz did not like what she saw and benched Destiny in the second half. Randy Hatch, the school administrator, did not like what he saw, either.
He had a hunch. And he had a tip. He ordered a drug test for Destiny the next morning.
That was why she was crying in Room 5.
¡°I¡¯m not going to be able to pass my drug screen,¡± she said when Lutz, Hatch and the school¡¯s security director, Patrick Steele, came into the room. And before she was escorted to the restroom to urinate into a cup, she pressed her face into Lutz¡¯s shoulder and sobbed.

Carroll Academy is in Huntingdon, about 100 miles east of Memphis and 100 miles west of Nashville in West Tennessee. It is a strictly run day school with about 80 students operated by the Carroll County Juvenile Court, filled with teenagers trying to work their way back to their home schools with the velvet-hammered guidance of parole officers and people like Lutz, Hatch and Steele.
Among the nine girls on the Carroll Academy basketball team, only one lives with both her mother and her father. A seventh grader, she lived with her parents and two younger siblings at a grandmother¡¯s house, having been evicted from one trailer and waiting to move into another.
A few of the players moved more than once during the season. A couple have lived for weeks or months in abandoned houses without water, electricity or heat. Few of the parents have steady jobs, and at least one is in jail.
One girl spent time in rehabilitation for alcoholism. At least one regularly smoked with her mother at one house and her father at another. Two worried aloud about their mothers¡¯ regular use of homemade methamphetamine, in a county where the judge signs two or three search warrants each week to break up meth labs. Most of the girls are on medication themselves, for attention-deficit disorder, bipolar disorder or depression. Some say their parents sometimes take the pills instead.
Few had played team sports. Fewer still had played on a basketball team. Most did not know one another, their lives scattered across small, depressed towns and rolling hills in West Tennessee.
The reasons for being ordered to Carroll Academy varied. Three of the girls on the team were kicked out of their home schools for a year, part of a zero-tolerance policy, after taking their parents¡¯ prescription pills to school. A few were habitual truants. A few had habits of rage ¡ªfighting at school or uncorking violent tempers at home.
For nine girls, ages 13 to 17, basketball is a way to keep their after-school time occupied, to provide them supervision, to give their worlds a bit of structure and to teach them about teamwork and trusting others.
¡°I want to teach them to be survivors,¡± said Judge Larry Logan of Carroll County Juvenile Court, who helped start the school in 1994 and sends many of the students there as part of their sentence. ¡°If you get knocked down, get back up. It¡¯s a good habit to have.¡±
For girls unaccustomed to positive reinforcement, it is reasonable to wonder about the value of losing, game after game after game, by scores this season like 80-8 and 65-7.
