The classic Chinese way to clean shrimp and ensure a succulent flavor and crisp texture, says Grace Young, author of ¡°Stir-Frying to the Sky¡¯s Edge,¡± is to use a combination of salt and water, either dousing the shrimp in two rinses of heavily salted water or rubbing the shrimp with salt, then rinsing with water. If you don¡¯t eat salt, then just rinse the shrimp with plain water. I recommend bunch spinach for this; you don¡¯t have to stem it, just cut away the base of the leaves and rinse well.
1 pound large shrimp, peeled and deveined
Salt to taste
1/8 teaspoon sugar
2 tablespoons canola oil or light sesame oil
1 tablespoon minced ginger
1 tablespoon minced garlic
1/4 to 1/2 teaspoon crumbled dried red chili
2 tablespoons sesame seeds
1 generous bunch spinach (about 1 pound), stems trimmed at the end, rinsed in 2 changes water
2 teaspoons dark sesame oil
1. Place the shrimp in a large colander and rinse with water. Sprinkle generously with salt and toss together for about a minute. Rinse with water and repeat. After rinsing one more time, drain on paper towels. Pat dry with more paper towels.
2. Combine 1/4 to 1/2 teaspoon salt (to taste) and the sugar in a small bowl and place close to your wok.
3. Heat a 14-inch flat-bottomed wok over high heat until a drop of water evaporates within a second or two when added to the pan. Swirl in 1 tablespoon of the oil by adding it to the sides of the pan and swirling the pan, then add the garlic, ginger and chili flakes and stir-fry for no more than 10 seconds. Push to the sides of the pan and add the shrimp in one layer. Let cook undisturbed for 1 minute, then add the remaining oil and stir-fry for 1 minute.
4. Add the sesame seeds and spinach and stir-fry for 1 minute, until it has begun to wilt but the wilting is still uneven. Add the salt and sugar, sprinkling it evenly over the spinach, and continue to stir-fry until the spinach has wilted but is still bright and the shrimp are cooked through and bright pink, about 2 more minutes. Remove from the heat, drizzle on the sesame oil, toss together and serve, with rice, noodles or other grains.
3 to 4 servings.
You can prepare the shrimp through Step 1 several hours ahead.
(3 servings): 293 calories; 18 grams fat; 2 grams saturated fat; 6 grams polyunsaturated fat; 9 grams monounsaturated fat; 191 milligrams cholesterol; 8 grams carbohydrates; 4 grams dietary fiber; 447 milligrams sodium (does not include salt to taste); 26 grams protein
(4 servings): 220 calories; 14 grams fat; 1 gram saturated fat; 4 grams polyunsaturated fat; 7 grams monounsaturated fat; 143 milligrams cholesterol; 6 grams carbohydrates; 3 grams dietary fiber; 335 milligrams sodium (does not include salt to taste); 19 grams protein

?
?
