Last October, a high school football coach named Greg Jessee was standing on the sidelines watching his son play when he felt a jolt to his chest. The heart defibrillator implanted in him five years earlier was firing wildly. The next jolt made him double up. The one after that knocked him unconscious.
In the hospital, doctors discovered that the cable, or lead, connecting the defibrillator to his heart had failed and that the electrical wires inside it had worked their way out through the lead¡¯s coating. Mr. Jessee, 50, said his doctor quickly notified the device¡¯s producer, St. Jude Medical, about the incident.
It was not the first report to the company about problems with defibrillator leads. Last summer, researchers in Northern Ireland reported that tests of patients who received the St. Jude lead showed that wires were protruding out of their casing in 15 percent of them.
Doctors and the company are now trying to understand the scope of the problem, but experts say it is extremely distressing because the wires are particularly dangerous to remove and also may pose dangers if they are left in.
For the heart device industry, the problem with the St. Jude leads is the third highly visible safety episode in the last seven years. As such, it is raising questions about whether the industry is adequately scrutinizing the safety of heart devices or whether the needs to take a more aggressive role. A defibrillator is a device that sends out an electrical jolt to interrupt a potentially fatal heart rhythm and restore the heart to normal beating.
Since 2005, St. Jude¡¯s two major competitors ¡ª Guidant, which sold its heart unit in 2006 to Boston Scientific, and Medtronic ¡ª have both faced instances in which patients were killed or injured by flawed products. Device producers have since adopted safeguards to alert them to problems before too many patients are injured.
Officials at St. Jude Medical, one of the nation¡¯s biggest producers of heart devices, insist they acted appropriately in warning doctors about the problem.
Daniel J. Starks, St. Jude¡¯s chief executive, said in a telephone interview that the company had hidden nothing. ¡°We¡¯ve been more transparent than others,¡± he said.
But several experts say they believe the company was slow to warn of the problem with the lead, which is estimated to be implanted in 128,000 patients worldwide.
One of the first investigators to examine the problem, Dr. Ernest W. Lau of Belfast, Northern Ireland, said that he took his concerns about the issue to St. Jude in 2010 and did not think that company officials responded appropriately.
¡°There should have been more warning,¡± said Dr. Lau, who is a heart device expert at Royal Victoria Hospital.
Several heart device experts said that the St. Jude incident represented a troubling repeat performance. As with Guidant and Medtronic, the crucial data highlighting the problems with St. Jude¡¯s leads did not come from its own monitoring systems, but from outside researchers. Several experts also said St. Jude appeared to play down the issue¡¯s seriousness.
¡°They have at multiple steps underplayed the gravity of the situation,¡± said Dr. Kenneth Ellenbogen, a device expert in Richmond who has consulted for St. Jude and its competitors.
The St. Jude leads at issue involve two models, the Riata and the Riata ST. The company stopped selling both models in late 2010. For the last several years it has been selling a defibrillator lead called the Durata, which it says has an extra coating of insulation that prevents the types of problems affecting the Riata models.
On Friday, St. Jude responded aggressively to its critics. It called for a medical journal, Heart Rhythm, to retract an article published last week about deaths associated with the Riata lead. The company contended that a researcher, Dr. Robert G. Hauser of Minneapolis, made several errors that made it appear that the Riata had produced more deaths than another widely used lead made by a competitor, Medtronic.
Mr. Starks and other St. Jude executives have also accused Medtronic of carrying out a whispering campaign suggesting that St. Jude¡¯s new Durata lead is prone to the same types of failures as the Riata.
