The hospital I work at has no 13th floor.
The absence can be a bit awkward to explain to people. I mean, here sits a building at the center of the modern evidence-based scientific empire. Yet as soon as we set foot in the elevator, it is clear that we have decided to hedge our bets a little, and play the dark side too.
This odd coupling of bullet-train rationality and primal superstition actually is quite common in science. I once worked for an investigator, the most methodical, robotic person I ever have known, who insisted on pointing all of the lab¡¯s workbenches toward the sun for good luck.
I myself have been known to avoid checking test results on certain very ill patients until I can sit at a specific computer. (It¡¯s a lucky workstation, honest.)
The truth is that despite the endless evidence demonstrating its nonexistence, all doctors believe in luck. We fight it, devoted as we are to upholding the premise of a rational, scientific world that hews only to that which is statistically significant, that wondrous city on the hill where cause and effect are sealed in eternal conjugation. But we are saddled with a few pre-Enlightenment attitudes, too.
Not that we care to admit it. Because not only does luck fall far outside the ordered rows of science, but where health is concerned, luck is far too arbitrary, too unfeeling, too senseless an explanation for any of us to accept. We all prefer to believe that we live in a crisp, predictable world where everything that happens has an evident cause.
? . ? Out of shape. Maintaining the fantasy of this-then-that gives us at least the satisfaction of appearing to control our destiny, when clearly we do not and cannot. Without this small delusion, we¡¯re just floating along like other hapless animals, wishing and hoping that maybe something good will drift our way. The Lotto life.
These days, medicine is working full time to diminish luck: Our entire research apparatus has set about lifting it from the primal darkness into the bright light of predictability. Scientific journals hum with studies that enumerate various possible dangers to tomorrow¡¯s health: cellphones, left-handedness, your height, your grandmother¡¯s height.
With each new association, however modest, another shadowy redoubt of chaos is overtaken and tamed by the glorious human mind, further closing the distance between cause and effect.
It¡¯s just that we haven¡¯t gotten that far. Apart from the predictable problems that result from advanced age or an already existing infirmity, as well as the occasional spool of bad genes, most of what happens to patients still falls well outside our understanding.
Surely the hardest part of any doctor¡¯s job is to explain to the patient, to the family, to himself just why things soured when a patient seemed to be doing so well. Alone in some conference room, we review the case, revisit the test results, examine again the X-rays, call a colleague. But it still doesn¡¯t add up; too often the reason for the patient¡¯s deterioration is no reason at all. Except perhaps bad luck.
Just what the term ¡°luck¡± means surely varies from person to person. For some, it falls under the long shadow of spirituality and religion, the result of karma or retribution or time off for good behavior.
For others, luck is a roll of the dice untouched by who or what or why, pure randomness. And for still others, luck cannot and must not exist ¡ª only our failures as scientists, doctors, people have blinded us to the gigantic truth before us.
But for all of us, luck is what we use to explain whatever it is we cannot really explain.
The 13th floor¡¯s spectral absence is a shrine of sorts, a grudging acknowledgment of how much we do not and cannot know. It¡¯s an acceptance of the randomness of fate and the role of chance in how a patient fares. Superstitious and primitive and a bit jarring, sure.
But, hey, you never know.
