If you have been following the so-called debate over the ¡ª often referred to by critics as Obamacare ¡ª you may be confused about what has changed so far and what it may mean in the future. You may even occasionally wish someone would draw you a diagram.
Now someone has done that, offering an easy-to-understand cartoon walk through the health care policy landscape. In ¡°Health Care Reform,¡± readers see patients, workers, employers and others confront some of the legislation¡¯s knotty issues, especially the mandate requiring everyone to have , the chief issue the Supreme Court will take up in March when justices hear challenges to the bill.
Prominent among the book¡¯s comic characters is its author, . Dr. Gruber, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, consulted with the Obama administration and Congress as the legislation was drafted, and he was one of the architects of the plan on which it is based, the Massachusetts health care law that Mitt Romney pushed through when he was governor but seems ready to forget in his quest for the Republican presidential nomination.
For critics of either law, Dr. Gruber¡¯s r¨¦sum¨¦ offers reason enough to consign the book to the dustbin. But that would be a mistake.
Though in the book, the cartoon Dr. Gruber makes no bones about his enthusiasm for the laws, he also lays out even-handedly what the biggest problems are with the way we finance health care today and how the federal law addresses them.
Through drawings by , the book tracks the journeys of four fictional Americans: Anthony, who is, like most of us, an employee of a company with health benefits; Betty, who is covered by ; Carlos, whose employer does not offer health benefits, leaving him to the mercy of the ¡°nongroup market¡±; and Dinah, who has no coverage at all.
As we follow them through job loss, auto wrecks and other health care woes, we absorb vivid lessons in what Dr. Gruber calls ¡°the two-headed beast¡± of American health finance: rising costs, and the rising numbers of Americans without adequate health insurance.
Cartoon characters in the book raise many of the questions Americans have wondered about. For example, the fact that thousands of Americans die each year because of inadequate insurance coverage may be ¡°all very sad,¡± the employed Anthony says, ¡°but I am insured. Why should I care?¡±
Employer-sponsored coverage is eroding, the cartoon Dr. Gruber tells him. And anyway, he asks, ¡°what are you going to do for coverage if you get laid off or your employer stops offering it?¡±
The book explains how the act bars insurance companies from dropping people who get sick, or charging them more, or refusing to cover care for pre-existing conditions. It also tells what happened when five Northeastern states tried to carry out these rules: ¡°Those five states became five of the most expensive places in the nation¡± for insurance customers outside of large group plans.
¡°But there is a solution,¡± the cartoon Dr. Gruber goes on. ¡°If we could guarantee that folks wouldn¡¯t just buy insurance when sick, then insurers could price fairly.¡±
What is this guarantee? The individual mandate, perhaps the most controversial element of the federal health law and the principal issue before the high court. Under the mandate, people who do not have government- or employer-paid coverage will have to buy it, with help from government subsidies if they qualify. As a result, the pool of insurance customers will grow, in theory keeping rates down.
The Supreme Court may rule against the mandate and permit the rest of the law to stand. But, as the experience of the New England states shows and as the Obama administration has asserted, other features of the law may be unworkable without the mandate. Many healthy people would probably choose not to buy insurance, the cartoon Dr. Gruber explains, because under the law they will be able to buy it without substantial penalty if they need it. The result: higher rates for everyone.
Perhaps naturally, given the real-life Dr. Gruber¡¯s enthusiasm for the legislation, the book sometimes sounds a bit rah-rah. And it occasionally wanders into the wonkish weeds ¡ª for example, in an explanation of the relative tax benefits businesses will enjoy under the new law when they compensate employees with health insurance coverage rather than raises in pay.
There are even those who will take issue with the book¡¯s title. After all, one person¡¯s reform is another person¡¯s misguided interference. But in this case, given the enormity of the nation¡¯s health insurance problem, the word feels fair enough.
Anyway, Dr. Gruber acknowledges that the full effect of the act is impossible to know until it plays out. He notes that the Congressional Budget Office predicts it will produce substantial big spending cuts, but he concedes that cost-cutting changes ¡°aren¡¯t easy to make.¡±
Going forward, he says, we will have to learn ¡°what works and what doesn¡¯t.¡±
That, too, like the book as a whole, is fair enough.
