Responding to changes in health care, big hospital groups are expected to get even bigger. And some hospitals will join forces with once-unlikely partners, health insurers and for-profit companies, a new report says.
The difficult business environment and the changes expected in how hospitals will be paid for delivering care are driving many smaller, stand-alone hospital groups into the arms of larger and better-financed organizations, said Lisa Goldstein, who follows nonprofit hospitals for and is one of the authors of a report expected to be released Thursday.
The report by Moody¡¯s predicts even more consolidation. ¡°We think the pace will accelerate,¡± she said.
While hospitals have always looked to mergers as a way of becoming larger, partly to demand higher payments from insurers, they are now also looking for ways to become more efficient. Hospitals are expecting to see lower reimbursements from and to find it increasingly difficult to persuade private insurers to pay more for care.
Public and private insurers also are demanding that hospitals work better with doctors both to coordinate care and to improve the quality of care so people stay out of emergency rooms and avoid hospital stays altogether.
?Markets like Chicago are already seeing a flurry of activity, Ms. Goldstein said. Two Catholic-sponsored systems, and , recently merged to become the largest Catholic system in Illinois. , another Catholic system, recently bought the Alexian Brothers Health System.
Some hospitals are joining forces in less formal ways than outright mergers or acquisitions. North Shore-LIJ Health System, one of the nation¡¯s largest nonprofit hospital groups, announced earlier this week that it had entered a strategic alliance with Hackensack University Health Network in New Jersey. Based on Long Island, North Shore bought Lenox Hill Hospital in a move that brought it into Manhattan in 2010.
Ms. Goldstein said the alliance with Hackensack could be a precursor to the system¡¯s expansion beyond New York State. While there are no definite plans yet, ¡°we are looking to broaden our outreach beyond New York,¡± said Terry Lynam, a spokesman for North Shore.
Ms. Goldstein also emphasized the possible emergence of new partners, including for-profit hospital groups and firms. For example, Cerberus Capital Management bought a Catholic hospital system in Boston, now Steward Health Care, and Oak Hill Capital Partners, another private equity player, established a partnership with Ascension Health to buy Catholic hospitals.
Depending on how well these acquisitions perform financially, other private equity groups may also enter the market.
¡°The other private equity funds are watching and waiting,¡± said Ms. Goldstein.
?Even companies could be possible buyers. In Pittsburgh, for example, Highmark, a large insurer, is planning to join forces with West Penn Allegheny Health System, a hospital system, to better compete with UPMC, the large medical center in that city.
?Insurers may be looking to join with hospitals as a way of improving their competitiveness, especially if they are expected to create networks of hospitals and doctors that are responsible for delivering and coordinating care for large communities.
Insurers need to think about combining with hospitals and doctors so they can be more of a one-stop shop, said John Nelson, a Moody¡¯s executive who also worked on the report.
In the end, patients are likely to have fewer hospitals from which to choose in any given market, but these combinations could result in a financially stronger system that is better able to deliver higher-quality care at lower costs, Ms. Goldstein said.
And there will still be some small, stand-alone hospitals, particularly in rural areas where there is only one hospital for miles.
¡°We¡¯re not going to predict the smaller independent hospitals will all shutter and close,¡± she said.
Of course, not all mergers and combinations will end happily. Hospital systems may be overly aggressive in their expansion plans, or the merger may fall apart, as it did when medical centers at New York University and Mount Sinai called off their combination.
?
