WASHINGTON ¡ª Throughout the two-year history of the health care litigation, judges have mocked the Obama administration¡¯s have-your-cake approach to the central question debated at the on Monday: whether the constitutional challenge is even ripe for judicial review before the law takes full effect in 2014. During the opening 90 minutes of oral argument, the justices found that they too could not resist.
The issue at hand, concerning whether the litigation is barred by a 145-year-old law called the Anti-Injunction Act, has long been awkward for the Justice Department. The act bars lawsuits challenging new taxes before the taxes are actually due.
If the Supreme Court determines that the law¡¯s mandate qualifies as a tax, because noncompliance would be punished as an income tax penalty, it could rule that a constitutional challenge cannot be filed until 2015, after the first fines are assessed. That would relieve the court of deciding the merits now.
In defending the law, the Justice Department has taken a legal position ¡ª that the health care act constitutes a tax ¡ª that contradicts the political stance taken by President Obama. To do that, it has relied on legal semantics to argue that the insurance mandate will be enforced through the tax code even though Congress took pains to label it a penalty and not a tax.
After losing that argument in a lower court, the government¡¯s lawyers switched positions to agree with the plaintiffs that the litigation was not blocked by the Anti-Injunction Act. But in its brief to the Supreme Court, the administration argued that while the penalty was not a tax that would fall under the Anti-Injunction Act, it should be viewed as a tax when the court considers on Tuesday whether the mandate is permitted under Congress¡¯s broad authority to levy taxes.
In other words, the Justice Department is essentially arguing that the penalty is not a tax, except when the government says it is one.
Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. was quick to highlight the seeming contradiction during Monday¡¯s session. ¡°Today you are arguing that the penalty is not a tax,¡± he told Solicitor General Donald B. Verrilli Jr., the administration¡¯s lead advocate. ¡°Tomorrow you are going to be back and you will be arguing that the penalty is a tax. Has the court ever held that something that is a tax for purposes of the taxing power under the Constitution is not a tax under the Anti-Injunction Act?¡±
Mr. Verrilli responded that it had not. He said that the choice of labels mattered in considering whether the Anti-Injunction Act applied to the case but was irrelevant in determining whether Congress could justify the insurance mandate as an exercise of its taxing power.
At another point, Justice Stephen G. Breyer chided Mr. Verrilli for using the word tax in responding to questions from the bench. ¡°Why do you keep saying tax?¡± the justice asked, leading Mr. Verrilli to amend his wording to ¡°tax penalty.¡±
The judge who first ruled on the case, Roger Vinson of Federal District Court in Pensacola, Fla., described the administration¡¯s position in a 2010 opinion as ¡°an Alice-in-Wonderland tack.¡± For good measure, he appended a footnote that quoted Alice in Lewis Carroll¡¯s ¡°Through the Looking Glass¡±: ¡°The question is whether you can make words mean so many different things.¡±
During oral arguments in a different lower-court challenge, Judge Henry Hudson of Federal District Court in Richmond, Va., was perhaps even more blunt about the rhetorical distance between Mr. Obama and his Justice Department. Mr. Obama, in a 2009 interview with ABC News, had said the insurance mandate is ¡°absolutely not a tax increase.¡±
¡°Let¡¯s characterize it correctly,¡± Judge Hudson remarked. ¡°They denied it was a tax. The president denied it. Was he trying to deceive the people?¡±
The many district court judges who heard various challenges to the typically ruled that the insurance mandate was not a tax and that the Anti-Injunction Act therefore did not prohibit a constitutional challenge. That position was taken both by judges who upheld the constitutionality of the insurance mandate and by those, like Judges Vinson and Hudson, who struck it down.
More often than not, that also was the opinion of the appeals courts that reviewed district court rulings before sending the case to the Supreme Court. But there were notable exceptions, and the split led the justices to request argument on the issue, even though the law¡¯s defenders and challengers are now in agreement that the Anti-Injunction Act should not make the case moot. The court appointed a Washington appellate lawyer, Robert A. Long, to argue the other side.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, which heard appeals of Judge Hudson¡¯s ruling against the law and of a separate ruling that upheld the law, concluded that the Anti-Injunction Act kept it from reaching the merits. In a 2-to-1 opinion issued last September, that court characterized the argument that the penalty was not a tax as ¡°wholly unpersuasive.¡±
That position also was taken by Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, who dissented from a majority opinion that upheld the health care act. Like other judges, Judge Kavanaugh used his opinion to tweak the Obama administration for the seeming flexibility of its position.
¡°By my count,¡± he wrote, ¡°the executive branch told 10 separate district courts that the Anti-Injunction Act barred these cases.¡± The administration later changed its mind, he noted, ¡°presumably because of an understandable policy desire to have courts resolve the constitutional question about the individual mandate sooner rather than later.¡±
