NEW YORK ¡ª Why do we claim things ¡°taste like chicken¡±? Why do television folk frame pitches like: ¡°Imagine ¡®Mad Men¡¯; now put it on a plane¡±? Why are new companies promoted as ¡°a mash-up of Twitter, YouTube and Instagram¡±?
The old is so often our bridge to the new, the familiar our escort to the unknown. Sure, there is distortion involved, because frogs have a taste of their own, or else they would be chickens. But these distortions are the price of a convenience: Without translation, we would often lack the courage or wherewithal to encounter the unfamiliar.
Metaphors and similes are bridges. This is especially true for writers, filmmakers, reporters and other storytellers, who seek to interpret places for other places. They stand between an audience who feeds them, with its own reality and language and understandings, and subjects who supply them their grist, with their own version of these things.
It is a perilous endeavor, this ferrying of the subject¡¯s reality across that gradient and into terms the audience can grasp. All too often, the subject ends up, rightly or not, feeling abused or exploited, his world translated into what he believes it is not. The social structure that seems to him to work just fine becomes someone else¡¯s ¡°caste system.¡± His religion is said to require a ¡°Reformation.¡± His country, despite pulling hundreds of millions from poverty, is called a violator of human rights, by people who imprison a vast proportion of their population and regularly invade other nations to get their way.
It is a particular problem that so much of this translation is still performed by so few. To steal language from the aviation sector, the narration of the human story still works more on a hub-and-spoke model than a point-to-point one.
A handful of translators ¡ª paid by the publishing and media empires of the West ¡ª fan out around the world and send its stories home. Nigeria¡¯s realities, and South Korea¡¯s and Cuba¡¯s and New Zealand¡¯s, travel to the hub of the Western storytelling complex; and when a South Korean wants a story about Nigeria, or a Cuban about New Zealand, they are very often compelled to make do with content assembled not on their soil, nor on the subject¡¯s, but in London or New York.
But the world and its power equations are changing. Countries once on the margin are moving toward the center. And the technologies by which we find, publish and spread stories have broken open who gets to speak and what they might say.
Imagine the future of storytelling in a point-to-point, not a hub-and-spoke, world. What happens when hundreds of Chinese correspondents are poking around America¡¯s prisons? And Egyptian filmmakers are investigating the situation of Muslims in Chechnya? And South Koreans are looking through the prism of their own experience at South Africa¡¯s democratic experiment?
These notions stirred as I was reading Katherine Boo¡¯s devastating, exhilarating first book, ¡°Behind the Beautiful Forevers: Life, Death, and Hope in a Mumbai Undercity.¡± The book has already received extraordinary praise, and the goal of this column is not belatedly to add to it. Instead, it is to suggest that Ms. Boo has done something much more interesting and subversive than write a terrific book: Though a product of the Western storytelling apparatus, she has pointed toward a new world in which writing about places is not an act of writing for somebody, but an act of writing from somebody.
Forget her bullet-train narration, her vividly painted characters, her achingly sad tale. Dwell on something much simpler, and infinitely harder: her metaphors, similes ¡ª the way she seeks to move the reality of her subjects into your mind.
Writing about slum dwellers in Mumbai, she tells us of two neighbors who, for a time, lived divided only by a sheet. It is not long before she refers to this time as ¡°the sheet days,¡± seeing it more from her subjects¡¯ perspective than ours. She writes of an audacious woman¡¯s ¡°gold-flecked, unlowering eyes,¡± without the usual (tedious) foreign correspondent explanation of why women in India might lower their eyes.
¡°Some days the lips were orange,¡± Ms. Boo, a staff writer for The New Yorker magazine, writes in another description, ¡°other days purple-red, as if she¡¯d climbed the jamun-fruit tree by the Hotel Leela and mouthed it clean.¡± The clause that begins ¡°as if¡± is at once for our benefit and not: It explicates, or at least elaborates; and yet many of her readers will not know what jamun-fruit is.
And so January becomes ¡°the month of treed kites and head colds.¡± A slum dweller with a recycling business finds ¡°a shiny oval belt buckle of promising recyclable weight.¡± A canny local politician has ¡°enough oil in his hair to fry garlic.¡±
My favorite of Ms. Boo¡¯s similes is her description of the well-dressed women who work in Mumbai¡¯s five-star hotels. She sees them ¡°carrying handbags as big as household shrines.¡±
In that little simile are wondrous new possibilities for literature and storytelling of every kind. Instead of the unfamiliar bent into what we know, the familiar here is complicated. A handbag, which we understood perfectly well before this passage, becomes something we understand less. Our mind becomes, for a moment, an Indian mind; and a shrine becomes, if fleetingly, more normal to us than a giant purse.
This literature without italics may hint at the storytelling future. Translation, explication, falls away. Places become at once subject and audience. Life on the planet is chronicled from every angle ¡ª from hub to spoke, spoke to hub, from point to point to point.
The fiduciary obligation of the storyteller is no longer to us who read her translations. It is to the people whose lives she witnesses. She writes from them, not for us.

