ASUNCI?N, Paraguay ¡ª Legislators on the floor of Congress deliver speeches in it. Lovers entwined on Asunci¨®n¡¯s park benches murmur sweet nothings with its high-pitched, nasal and guttural sounds. Soccer fans use it when insulting referees.
To this day, Paraguay remains the only country in the Americas where a majority of the population speaks one indigenous language: Guaran¨ª. It is enshrined in the Constitution, officially giving it equal footing with the language of European conquest, Spanish. And in the streets, it is a source of national pride.
¡°Only 54 of nearly 12,000 schools teach Portuguese,¡± said Nancy Ben¨ªtez, director of curriculum at the Ministry of Education, of the language of Brazil, the giant neighbor that dominates trade with Paraguay. ¡°But every one of our schools teaches Guaran¨ª.¡±
Paraguay differs significantly even from other multilingual Latin American nations like neighboring Bolivia, where a majority of the population is indigenous. Languages like Quechua and Aymara are spoken by different groups there, but rarely by people of mixed ancestry or the traditional elite.
In Paraguay, indigenous peoples account for less than 5 percent of the population. Yet Guaran¨ª is spoken by an estimated 90 percent of Paraguayans, including many in the middle class, upper-crust presidential candidates, and even newer arrivals.
¡°Mba¡¯¨¦ichapa?¡± asked Alex Jun, 27, a Korean immigrant who works in his family¡¯s restaurant in Asunci¨®n¡¯s old center, as he greeted customers with a Guaran¨ª phrase translating as ¡°How are you?¡±
¡°We¡¯d go broke if we didn¡¯t know the basics,¡± he explained.
Linguists and historians say the complex reasons for the broad use of the indigenous language here date to the earliest days of Spain¡¯s incursions in the 16th century. The encomienda, a system common within the Spanish empire that forced indigenous people to work for Europeans and their descendants, did not penetrate big parts of the territory that eventually became Paraguay.
Meanwhile, Jesuits created communities for the Guaran¨ª and other indigenous groups covering vast expanses, as depicted in the 1986 film ¡°.¡± They armed Guaran¨ª Indians against slaving expeditions, while nourishing the language in books and sermons.
When Spain expelled the Jesuits in 1767, more than 100,000 Guaran¨ª speakers spread throughout Paraguay, said Shaw N. Gynan, an American linguist. Decades later, Guaran¨ª speakers formed the bulk of support for the post-independence ruler Jos¨¦ Gaspar Rodr¨ªguez de Francia, who took aim at the Spanish-speaking elite.
A despot who ruled until 1840, Francia was called Cara¨ª Guaz¨², Great Lord. He banned those in the light-skinned upper class from marrying each other, sealed Paraguay¡¯s borders and used Guaran¨ª-speaking informants called pyragues, or fleet-footed ones, to bolster his tyrannical regime.
The result: a hobbled Europeanized elite by the end of Francia¡¯s rule. Other dictators would later use Guaran¨ª to stir nationalist fervor. Generals rallied troops in Guaran¨ª in the devastating Triple Alliance War in the 1860s, which killed more than 60 percent of the population.
Isolation also sustained Guaran¨ª. The Paraguayan novelist , who mixed Guaran¨ª with Spanish in his writing, called this landlocked, California-size nation an ¡°island surrounded by land.¡±
Under Gen. , the dictator who ruled from 1954 to 1989, Guaran¨ª thrived. At one point during General Stroessner¡¯s rule, the writer Graham Greene warned that visitors risked being shot in the street by police officers if they did not understand Guaran¨ª.
General Stroessner, the son of a Bavarian immigrant and his Guaran¨ª-speaking wife, made it an official language, employed his own espionage network of pyragues and rewarded rural Guaran¨ª-speakers with land for their loyalty.
