BANGKOK ¡ª Two powerful earthquakes struck about two hours apart off the coast of Sumatra on Wednesday afternoon, spreading panic among residents of the Indonesian island and reviving memories of the devastating 2004 earthquake and tsunami in the same area.
There were no reports of casualties or significant damage, and the tsunami warnings that were widely broadcast on television, cellphones and the Internet were called off again a few hours later.
The first quake, whose magnitude was measured at 8.6 by the United States Geological Survey, was centered about 200 miles offshore and was felt across a large area. Tremors were felt in Bangladesh, India, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand as well as . The second quake, measured at 8.2, was somewhat farther offshore.
Though the quakes did not ultimately cause a tsunami, they tested the region¡¯s tsunami warning systems, as residents fled coastal areas for higher ground. In Banda Aceh, at the northern end of Sumatra, the hurried, spontaneous evacuation came after several minutes of heavy shaking.
The earthquake knocked out electricity and tied up cellphone service, according to Edo Iskandar, a 56-year-old driver who said he was drinking coffee at an outdoor restaurant when the earthquake struck in the midafternoon. ¡°People started running out into the street,¡± he said. ¡°All the people at the food stall, people from shops, houses, everybody was in the street panicking, running and looking for higher ground.¡±
Television footage showed patients wheeled from hospitals on gurneys and traffic-clogged streets in one direction ¡ª away from the sea.
The tsunami siren sounded, Mr. Iskandar said.
In southern Thailand, one witness described a more orderly move to tsunami shelters.
¡°The evacuation went well, as planned,¡± said Mitree Jongkraijak, the head of a tsunami response team in Baan Nam Khem, a village destroyed by the 2004 tsunami. ¡°All of the volunteers were at their stations,¡± he told a Thai television station.
The 2004 tsunami, caused by a giant magnitude 9.1 earthquake, killed 230,000 people in more than a dozen countries.
Wednesday¡¯s earthquakes were farther away from Sumatra than the 2004 quake, and seismologists said the horizontal motion of the strongest quake made it less likely to set off a large tsunami. The quake two hours later was the strongest of many aftershocks.
Indonesia¡¯s president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, told reporters at a news conference in Jakarta that the earthquake had caused ¡°a little bit of panic.¡±
The initial quake struck at a depth of 14 miles with an epicenter 269 miles southwest of Banda Aceh, according to the United States Geological Survey. The strongest aftershock was measured at a depth of 10 miles.
Bruce Pressgrave, a geophysicist with the survey, said the first earthquake was believed to have come from a ¡°strike-slip fault,¡± which would reduce the likelihood of a destructive tsunami. The wall of such faults moves horizontally with little vertical motion, he told a BBC news program.
¡°Since the motion is horizontal, it is not moving the water column, it is less likely to produce a destructive tsunami,¡± Mr. Pressgrave said.
On the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the closest Indian territory to the earthquake¡¯s epicenter, officials and hotel managers said they felt the earth move around 2:15 p.m., but said there was no sign of a tsunami or even big waves nearly two hours later.
Cmdr. Bindu Prakash, an Indian Navy officer based on the islands, said there had been no noticeable rise in sea levels even past the estimated time that the tsunami was supposed to hit the islands. He said the official tsunami warning was still in effect as a precaution.
Deepika Mandal, an employee at the Fortune Resort Bay Island hotel in the capital of Port Blair, reported nothing unusual. The sea was ¡°absolutely calm,¡± he said.
