SEOUL, South Korea ¡ª For the new North Korean leader, , the spectacular failure of a rocket meant to put a satellite into orbit was more than a $1 billion humiliation. It could be the first test of whether anyone will dare challenge his rule, and raises the question, American officials said, of whether he will be tempted to recover by staging a larger provocation.
Mr. Kim wanted to mark his formal ascension to top political power ¡ª timed to the country¡¯s biggest holiday in decades, the 100th anniversary of the birth of his grandfather and ¡¯s founder, Kim Il-sung ¡ª with fireworks, real and symbolic. Instead, the rocket carrying the satellite splintered harmlessly into the gray-blue waters of the Yellow Sea, and the North Korean government apparently concluded it had no choice but to tell its citizens the embarrassing news, which was bound to get around in a country that now has at least one million cellphones. It was the first time the country had admitted such a defeat.
For President Obama and his allies, though, the bigger question was not the fate of an aging rocket technology, but the future of a young dictator. The failure injected new unpredictability at an already uncertain time, when Kim Jong-un is trying to consolidate power, and raised new questions only weeks after Mr. Obama suggested that it was unclear who was really running North Korea.
There was considerable speculation on Friday among American and South Korean officials that Mr. Kim and his military, to re-establish some credibility, would stage a new nuclear test, for which preparations have been evident on satellite photographs for several weeks. ¡°The North Koreans have tended to pursue patterns of provocative actions,¡± Benjamin J. Rhodes, a deputy national security adviser, told reporters aboard .
The embarrassment means the United States probably has more time before it has to worry about the North¡¯s ability to launch an intercontinental ballistic missile, one that could reach the West Coast. Until now, the American assessment had been that the North could have that capability within five years. (The technology to launch a small satellite into orbit is virtually identical to the missile technology to launch a warhead, so the rocket failure Friday suggests problems with the missile program.)
But American officials said that was little solace. There is a risk, even if a remote one, that the North will repeat the kind of attacks on a border island and a South Korean Navy vessel in 2010 for which it has been blamed.
The very fact that the rocket test happened meant that the young Mr. Kim, believed to be about 28, was either willing to defy , which warned against the test, or was overruled by others in the power structure. The first option is worrisome, because it would suggest that, as the Chinese claim, they have very little influence. The second could suggest a struggle for influence, if not actual leadership. In an opaque country that is fiercely armed and is believed to have a half-dozen or more or the plutonium to produce them, the idea of power struggles makes officials nervous.
¡°Frankly,¡± one senior American intelligence official said before the launching¡¯s failure, ¡°I¡¯d rather have an unstable Kim Jong-un in charge than a free-for-all where you are wondering who¡¯s really in control of the arsenal.¡±
Recent machinations over a deal in which the North promised to suspend some nuclear work for American , then reneged quickly on a pledge to suspend long-range missile tests, at least raised the possibility that such a power struggle could be under way. And despite American officials¡¯ worries, there is one situation in which it could lead to more moderate behavior: if the failed missile launching emboldens those who have long believed in reaching some accord with the West and now can make the case that hard-liners fumbled the provocation, which in the end scuttled the agreement to bring in much-needed food.
The launching drew swift, if predictable and somewhat toothless, international condemnation; the United Nations Security Council has prohibited such tests by the North for years, and Pyongyang has ignored it for just as long. But whatever steps the Security Council takes are likely to be weak ¡ª there are few sanctions left that have not already been attempted, and there are fears that stronger action could simply push the North to conduct a nuclear test, as it has done when condemned in the past.
Despite the embarrassing setback, Mr. Kim was installed hours after the rocket fizzled as the new head of the National Defense Commission, his country¡¯s highest state agency, during a parliamentary meeting. That was the last among the top military, party and state posts that have been transferred to him after the death of his father, Kim Jong-il, in December.
For the launching, North Korea has recently completed a new site near the western border with China ¡ª at a cost of $400 million, according to South Korean estimates. The rocket itself cost another $450 million, the South Korean government believes. And the lost American food aid was estimated to be worth $200 million, driving the effective cost of the test above $1 billion in a country that cannot feed its own people.
