ISTANBUL ¡ª and six world powers agreed Saturday to hold a new round of talks in Baghdad on May 23, Catherine Ashton, the European Union¡¯s foreign policy chief, said after the first meeting in nearly 15 months on Tehran¡¯s disputed .
Ms. Ashton, speaking for the six nations, called the daylong meeting ¡°constructive and useful¡± and said that ¡°we want now to move to a sustained process of dialogue.¡± She gave no specifics on any proposals made during the sessions, but said that the six nations were satisfied that Iran was serious about negotiations that ¡°will lead to concrete steps toward a comprehensive negotiated solution which restores international confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear program.¡±
Testing Iran¡¯s willingness to negotiate seriously on its nuclear program was the purpose of this meeting, European and American officials said. That was a low bar to hurdle and represented no real breakthrough, and there were no negotiations here on specific steps or proposals. The lack of concrete detail is likely to lead to political criticism of President Obama as the presidential election campaign unfolds and will make the meeting in Iraq even more important.
The weeks until May 23 will be used by experts on both sides to draw up a concrete agenda for those talks, Ms. Ashton said.
A senior American official at the talks emphasized that this meeting was about testing Iran¡¯s seriousness. ¡°But dialogue is not sufficient for any sanction relief,¡± said the official, who, like others involved, spoke on the condition of anonymity as a matter of diplomatic practice. ¡°There must be an urgent effort and concrete steps,¡± the official said, to restore confidence in Iran¡¯s assertion that its program is not military.
¡°We believe there is a conducive atmosphere, but we need to test it,¡± and success in Baghdad is not at all guaranteed, the official added, repeating Mr. Obama¡¯s warning that ¡°the window for diplomacy is closing.¡±
A senior European diplomat at the talks said that ¡°we¡¯ve opened a box, and now we have to fill it.¡± The Iranians were serious and receptive, but in a sense, he said, ¡°we¡¯ve pushed the problem six weeks down the road,¡± and the six powers must work hard to shape the Baghdad agenda and decide what to do in response to possible Iranian actions. Although Iran said it would have new proposals, the diplomat said there were none, but rather a promise for a serious dialogue.
The leader of the Iranian delegation, Saeed Jalili, told reporters that there were important points of agreement as well as differences. He praised the ¡°desire of the other side for dialogue and cooperation¡± and said that ¡°we consider that as a positive sign,¡± compared with ¡°the language of threats and pressure that do not work on the Iranian people.¡±
During the talks, Mr. Jalili held a 90-minute session with Ms. Ashton in which he argued that since Iran was cooperating with the International Atomic Energy Agency, sanctions should be lifted, but he was rebuffed, another European diplomat said.
Russia and China maintained a unified stance with the other four nations ¡ª the United States, Britain, France and Germany ¡ª and Russia was chosen to begin the discussion because of its relatively close ties to Iran. But after Mr. Jalili thanked Moscow for its support, the Russian delegate, Sergei Rybakov, said bluntly that ¡°Russia doesn¡¯t have to be thanked, but you need to do what we need you to do,¡± a senior European diplomat said.
The centerpiece for future talks, Ms. Ashton said, will be the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, which permits peaceful nuclear energy but requires strict oversight and monitoring by the atomic agency, which has been rebuffed in its efforts to investigate possible evidence of Iranian efforts to make a nuclear bomb.
¡°We want now to move to a sustained process of serious dialogue, where we can take urgent practical steps to build confidence and lead on to compliance by Iran with all its international obligations,¡± Ms. Ashton said. ¡°In our efforts to do so, we will be guided by the principle of the step-by-step approach and reciprocity.¡±
