TOKYO ¡ª Hoping to avert potentially devastating summer power shortages, Prime Minister said Friday that his government would seek to restart two nuclear reactors, in what would be a first step toward ending an almost complete shutdown of the nation¡¯s nuclear power industry.
Mr. Noda declared units No. 3 and No. 4 at the Ohi Nuclear Power Plant in western to be safe based on the results of computer simulations designed to check the reactors¡¯ tolerance of a large earthquake and tsunami like those last year that knocked out cooling systems at the Fukushima Daiichi plant. The resulting meltdowns and explosions spewed radiation across a wide area of northeastern Japan and the Pacific Ocean in the worst nuclear accident since the one at Chernobyl a quarter century earlier.
Mr. Noda now faces the tricky task of convincing skeptical local leaders and voters in Fukui prefecture, where the Ohi plant is located, that it is safe to turn the reactors back on. Public concerns about safety after the Fukushima accident have prevented Japan from restarting any of its nuclear reactors as they have been gradually taken offline for legally mandated maintenance checks.
Currently, only one of the nation¡¯s 54 commercial reactors remains in operation, and it is due to be shut down for maintenance in early May.
The shutdowns, which have cut the nation¡¯s electricity supply by up to a third, have raised cries of alarm from business groups about higher energy prices and the risk of power cutoffs.
The minister of industry, Yukio Edano, warned on Friday that the power shortages are likely to be felt most acutely during the summer, when people turn on their air-conditioners. He said that unless Ohi and other plants were turned back on, the plant¡¯s operator, Kansai Electric Power, might be able to generate only 80 percent of the amount of electricity used during past summers.
¡°I have to say we are facing the risk of a very severe electricity shortage,¡± Mr. Edano told reporters.
Mr. Edano said he would travel to Fukui over the weekend to persuade local leaders to accept the restart of the Ohi plant. He will meet with Fukui¡¯s governor and also with the mayor of the town of Ohi, both of whom have called for new safety standards that reflect the lessons of the Fukushima accident.
Last week, Mr. Noda¡¯s government adopted those new standards, and asked plant operators to submit plans for improving defenses against tsunamis and for other safety measures. Faced with complaints that the upgrades could be dragged out over several years, the government forced some operators to introduce the new measures more quickly.
