SEOUL, South Korea ¡ª In his first speech in public since assuming the leadership of , said Sunday that his ¡°first, second and third¡± priorities were to strengthen the military, and he declared that superiority in military technology was ¡°no longer monopolized by imperialists.¡±
Mr. Kim¡¯s speech was followed by what South Korean officials said was the North¡¯s biggest display of weapons in a military parade, including a missile the North appeared to be presenting for the first time. While it is not clear whether it was a new long-range missile or a mock-up, its display demonstrates the importance that the North Korean government places on weapons development despite an embarrassing failure of a rocket it launched last week.
South Korean officials would not comment on the North Korean missile, pending further examination.
Mr. Kim¡¯s claim to superior military technology could sound poignant, coming two days after the North Korean rocket carrying a satellite disintegrated in midair. The failure of the rocket indicated that North Korea might still have a long way to go before mastering the technology to deliver warheads atop an intercontinental ballistic missile.
Mr. Kim¡¯s speech on the 100th birthday of Kim Il-sung, his grandfather and the North¡¯s founding president, was his public political debut. In an unexpected 20-minute speech, broadcast live inside North Korea, Mr. Kim demonstrated a new leadership style but reaffirmed his adherence to the ¡°military first¡± policy of his father, Kim Jong-il, which has left North Korea locked in a prolonged confrontation with the United States and its allies.
His speech was a major departure from the practices of his reclusive father, who cloaked his brutal rule in mystery and who never gave a speech to the general public before his death in December. North Koreans did not even hear Kim Jong-il¡¯s voice until a broadcast in 1992, when he shouted one sentence into the microphone while inspecting a military parade: ¡°Glory to the heroic soldiers of the People¡¯s Army.¡±
On Sunday, facing tens of thousands gathered in a plaza in the capital, Pyongyang, Mr. Kim did not mention the rocket failure. Instead, he exhorted his people to appreciate the achievements of his father and grandfather, crediting them with developing as a deterrent against American invasion.
¡°The days are gone forever when our enemies could blackmail us with nuclear bombs,¡± he said.
Mr. Kim has been seen but not heard by the public since taking over after his father¡¯s death. A thunderous cheer erupted when he appeared on the podium, waving a hand at the crowd gathered beneath in neat rows for the meticulously choreographed festivities. Thousands of balloons were released.
An emotional North Korean television broadcaster marveled at how the young leader had ¡°the look and voice¡± of his charismatic grandfather, who is much revered in the North. Reading a prepared text, Mr. Kim spoke in a calm, measured and somewhat husky voice, occasionally looking up from the text to squint at the crowd under the sun.
The only gesture he made was when he raised a finger to emphasize the last sentence of his speech: ¡°Let¡¯s go on for our final victory.¡±
Analysts said that Mr. Kim¡¯s physical resemblance to his grandfather, his gregariousness in the public eye ¡ª easily mixing with soldiers, workers and aging generals ¡ª and even his willingness to address the nation on state television were carefully cultivated assets for a leader in his late 20s hoping to give his government a more youthful appeal. (The portraits of Marx and Lenin that once adorned prominent buildings in Pyongyang were taken down ahead of the Sunday celebrations, The Associated Press reported from the North Korean capital.)
Cheong Seong-chang of the Sejong Institute, a private research institute in South Korea, said Mr. Kim¡¯s performance reminded North Koreans of Kim Il-sung, who as a young leader used to meet citizens and give public speeches. ¡°Kim Jong-il inspired awe and dread among his people and was never a leader friendly with the public,¡± Mr. Cheong said. ¡°Like his grandfather, however, Kim Jong-un has so far tried to look more willing to communicate with his people. We may see him speak in public more often.¡±
