RIO BRANCO, Brazil ¡ª Edmar Ara¨²jo still remembers the awe.
As he cleared trees on his family¡¯s land decades ago near Rio Branco, an outpost in the far western reaches of the Brazilian Amazon, a series of deep earthen avenues carved into the soil came into focus.
¡°These lines were too perfect not to have been made by man,¡± said Mr. Ara¨²jo, a 62-year-old cattleman. ¡°The only explanation I had was that they must have been trenches for the war against the Bolivians.¡±
But these were no foxholes, at least not for any . According to stunning archaeological discoveries here in recent years, the earthworks on Mr. Ara¨²jo¡¯s land and hundreds like them nearby are much, much older ¡ª potentially upending the conventional understanding of the world¡¯s largest tropical .
The deforestation that has stripped the Amazon since the 1970s has also exposed a long-hidden secret lurking underneath thick rain forest: flawlessly designed geometric shapes spanning hundreds of yards in diameter.
Alceu Ranzi, a Brazilian scholar who helped discover the squares, octagons, circles, rectangles and ovals that make up the land carvings, said these geoglyphs found on deforested land were as significant as , the enigmatic animal symbols visible from the air in southern Peru.
¡°What impressed me the most about these geoglyphs was their geometric precision, and how they emerged from forest we had all been taught was untouched except by a few nomadic tribes,¡± said Mr. Ranzi, a paleontologist who first saw the geoglyphs in the 1970s and, years later, surveyed them by plane.
For some scholars of human history in Amazonia, the geoglyphs in the Brazilian state of Acre and other archaeological sites suggest that the forests of the western Amazon, previously considered uninhabitable for sophisticated societies partly because of the quality of their soils, may not have been as ¡°Edenic¡± as some environmentalists contend.
Instead of being pristine forests, barely inhabited by people, parts of the Amazon may have been home for centuries to large populations numbering well into the thousands and living in dozens of towns connected by road networks, explains the American writer Charles C. Mann. In fact, according to Mr. Mann, the British explorer Percy Fawcett vanished on his 1925 quest to find the lost ¡°¡± in the Xingu, one area with such urban settlements.
In addition to parts of the Amazon being ¡°much more thickly populated than previously thought,¡± Mr. Mann, the author of ¡°1491,¡± a groundbreaking book about the Americas before the arrival of Columbus, said, ¡°these people purposefully modified their environment in long-lasting ways.¡±
As a result of long stretches of such human habitation, South America¡¯s colossal forests may have been a lot smaller at times, with big areas resembling relatively empty savannas.
Such revelations do not fit comfortably into today¡¯s politically charged debate over , with some environmentalists opposed to allowing any large-scale agriculture, like cattle ranching and soybean cultivation, to advance further into Amazonia.
Scientists here say they, too, oppose wholesale burning of the forests, even if research suggests that the Amazon supported intensive agriculture in the past. Indeed, they say other swaths of the tropics, notably in Africa, could potentially benefit from strategies once used in the Amazon to overcome soil constraints.
¡°If one wants to recreate pre-Columbian Amazonia, most of the forest needs to be removed, with many people and a managed, highly productive landscape replacing it,¡± said William Woods, a geographer at the University of Kansas who is part of a team studying the Acre geoglyphs.
¡°I know that this will not sit well with ardent environmentalists,¡± Mr. Woods said, ¡°but what else can one say?¡±
While researchers piece together the Amazon¡¯s ecological history, mystery still shrouds the origins of the geoglyphs and the people who made them. So far, 290 such earthworks have been found in Acre, along with about 70 others and 30 in the Brazilian states of Amazonas and Rond?nia.
Researchers first viewed the geoglyphs in the 1970s, after Brazil¡¯s military dictatorship encouraged settlers to move to Acre and other parts of the Amazon, using the nationalist slogan ¡°occupy to avoid surrendering¡± to justify the settlement that resulted in deforestation.
But little scientific attention was paid to the discovery until Mr. Ranzi, the Brazilian scientist, began his surveys in the late 1990s, and Brazilian, Finnish and American researchers began finding more geoglyphs by using high-resolution satellite imagery and small planes to fly over the Amazon.
Denise Schaan, an archaeologist at the Federal University of Par¨¢ in Brazil who now leads research on the geoglyphs, said radiocarbon testing indicated that they were built 1,000 to 2,000 years ago, and might have been rebuilt several times during that period.
