ASTRAKHAN, Russia ¡ª With their political credibility largely on the line, the organizers of Moscow¡¯s huge antigovernment street protests staged a rare major action outside the capital on Saturday, rallying about 1,500 people against suspected ballot fraud in Astrakhan¡¯s mayoral election.
It was a modest turnout, showing that the antigovernment forces are still fumbling for a way forward and are so far unable to surmount public indifference and light a fire for political reform. A pro-government rally earlier in the day drew far more people, some carrying signs that said, ¡°Emissaries, Time to Go Home.¡±
The after parliamentary elections were among the largest since the fall of the Soviet Union, but they fizzled after Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin easily . Organizers, conceding that they lacked concrete goals, developed Plan B: a focus on local politics, hoping to rally the rest of Russia to their cause.
Astrakhan, a regional southern capital near where the Volga River reaches the Caspian Sea, offered a dramatic backdrop: Oleg V. Shein, a candidate for mayor from the opposition Just Russia party, was on a to protest suspected ballot fraud that he said had cost him the race.
Mikhail Stolyarov, a candidate from Mr. Putin¡¯s United Russia party, was named the winner.
The rally took place on a sun-splashed public square after a week of heavy publicity.
When , said she was flying in from Moscow to attend the rally, wrote on Twitter, ¡°Sobchak is coming to Astrakhan ¡ª bringing Molotov cocktails and seven pairs of shoes.¡±
At the rally, Mr. Navalny said he arrived in Astrakhan to find a huge police presence and wondered where he was.
¡°Why so much police?¡± Mr. Navalny asked. ¡°Is this a sector of Gaza? Is this the Republic of Chad? Is it Syria or Libya?¡± The crowd shouted, ¡°No!¡±
Mr. Navalny continued: ¡°I am afraid that the guys who sit in the power offices in the Kremlin forgot the name of our country. What is the name of our country?¡±
¡°Russia!¡± the crowd roared, and began to chant. ¡°Russia! Russia! Russia!¡±
Maksim Vitorgan, an actor, said, ¡°Let¡¯s live by the Constitution and not by the regulations for a population in an occupied territory.¡±
But even the presence of celebrities failed to motivate residents who seemed apathetic, or at least otherwise occupied a day before the Easter.
Still, while the meager turnout suggested little appetite in Russia for an antigovernment road show from Moscow, Mr. Shein¡¯s case is turning into a serious political dispute in the new Parliament, which United Russia now controls by only a slim majority.
The organizers from Moscow were joined by a large contingent of lawmakers from Just Russia, including the party¡¯s leader, Sergei Mironov, who led the crowd on an impromptu march from Mr. Shein¡¯s headquarters.
Mr. Mironov said Mr. Shein would pursue a lawsuit seeking to overturn the election results. He also raised the possibility of trying to organize a ballot referendum in Astrakhan, in which residents would be asked if they support Mayor Stolyarov.
¡°His hunger strike showed the entire country that there are people for whom justice and truth and honesty and, human dignity is more important than anything in the world,¡± Mr. Mironov said.
Mr. Shein has made a credible case that the election results were tainted ¡ª though it is impossible at this point to know if irregularities would have changed the outcome. He and his supporters have pointed to a stark difference in results in election districts that used new electronic counters and those where ballots were tallied by hand.
Comparing eight such districts in one section of the city, the results show Mr. Shein winning solid majorities in the four districts with electronic counting, but losing by what seem to be absurdly large margins in the other four.
Mr. Shein said his hunger strike would continue at least until early in the week, when he expects some determination from election officials in Moscow who are reviewing video evidence of suspected violations.
After the speeches, a contingent of demonstrators set off on another march and challenged police officers, at one point facing off with them on a street where officers had formed a cordon.
Dmitry Gudkov, a member of Parliament with Just Russia, called on those in the crowd to return for another rally next Saturday.
As night fell, the Astrakhan Kremlin glowed white against a nearly starless sky as many people carried traditional Easter cakes to church to be blessed by priests.
In the dark outside his headquarters, Mr. Shein thanked his supporters, while Mr. Navalny urged them to appeal to residents for support. ¡°We have to work hard to be sure the entire city is here next Saturday,¡± he said.
Protesters set up a tent in the street, and several were quickly detained but later released.
