KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia ¡ª The Malaysian government introduced legislation on Tuesday that would limit the time it could detain people suspected of security-related offenses without formal charges to 28 days. The bill would replace the Internal Security Act, a law enacted decades ago that allows indefinite detention without trial.
The legislation, which is expected to be approved by Parliament next week, is the latest in a series of moves toward improved civil liberties that Prime Minister has made as elections approach.
¡°I am confident it will give police the powers they need to protect national security and combat terrorism, at the same time as introducing new safeguards for civil liberties to ensure the highest standards are upheld,¡± Mr. Najib said in a statement on Tuesday. ¡°This is a historic day for Malaysia and another major step forward on the road to reform.¡±
Rights groups say that the Internal Security Act has long been used to silence government critics. Between 2000 and 2010, almost 4,500 people were detained under the act. The authorities said in September that 37 people were still being held under the law, which dates from 1960.
The new legislation says that no one can be arrested or detained on the basis of political belief or activity. It says that a suspect may be detained only for the purposes of an active investigation, and that after 28 days the public prosecutor must either send the case to trial or release the suspect.
Phil Robertson, Asia deputy director of Human Rights Watch, said the new legislation had some positive elements, like the time limit on detention and a requirement that detainees have access to a lawyer. But Mr. Robertson said that there were also worrisome aspects, including a clause that would allow someone acquitted of a security offense to be detained while prosecutors appeal the verdict.
¡°It¡¯s a very serious concern,¡± he said. ¡°The implementation of this law could be quite troublesome.¡±
Nora Murat, the executive director of Amnesty International¡¯s Malaysia branch, said she hoped that the 28-day period would be a definite limit and that ¡°there wouldn¡¯t be any other loopholes that allow further detention.¡± Ms. Murat said she welcomed the clause specifying that people could not be arrested for their political beliefs, adding that such arrests had been one of the core problems of the existing law.
The Malaysian Bar Council, while supporting the move to replace the Internal Security Act, said that the new legislation defined security-related offenses too broadly. Syed Ibrahim Syed Noh, the chairman of Abolish ISA, a Malaysian lobbying group, said the law ¡°does not go far enough to protect civil liberties.¡±
In September, Mr. Najib pledged to strengthen civil liberties, not long after the police were widely criticized for using tear gas and water cannons to disperse a demonstration here in Kuala Lumpur, the capital.
Since then, the government has taken steps to allow university students to join political parties, and a parliamentary committee has recommended changes to the electoral system. But many of the measures enacted in recent months have failed to satisfy critics, who say that the government has not gone far enough to provide greater democratic rights.
