LONDON ¡ª A high-profile British lawyer who has been closely involved in pursuing the hacking scandal at ¡¯s British tabloids said on Thursday that he planned for the first time to sue on behalf of alleged victims in the United States, the center of Mr. Murdoch¡¯s global media empire.
The lawyer, Mark Lewis, confirmed in a telephone interview that he would take legal action on behalf of three people ¡ª a well-known sports person, a sports person not in the public eye and an American citizen, none of whom he would further identify. The suits had not yet been filed, he said, but would be pursued with the aid of Norman Siegel, a lawyer who once was director of the New York Civil Liberties Union.
Mr. Siegel, who has represented many of the families of those killed in the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, did not immediately respond to a message seeking comment.
¡° had thousands of people they hacked,¡± Mr. Lewis said, when announcing the suits in an interview with the BBC, referring to the Sunday tabloid that Mr. Murdoch closed down last year as the hacking scandal engulfed it. ¡°Some of them were in America at the time, either traveling or resident there.¡±
It was not immediately clear how or whether the action would affect the News Corporation, the parent company of News International, the Murdoch family¡¯s British newspaper subsidiary. News International declined immediate comment on the cases.
In September, Mr. Lewis said that he had held discussions with American lawyers about the steps necessary to open proceedings against News Corporation in New York, and that he expected the process to begin soon. In an interview at the time, Mr. Lewis said that the legal action in the United States would focus on the ¡°News Corporation¡¯s liability for actions by its foreign subsidiaries,¡± including The News of the World.
He said the lawsuits would focus on the revelations of widespread phone hacking in Britain and on accusations that the police were bribed to assist in the tabloid¡¯s pursuit of scoops.
Mr. Lewis¡¯s clients in the hacking scandal include the family of Milly Dowler, an abducted teenager who was found murdered in an outer London suburb in 2002, and whose voice mail was said to have been hacked after she disappeared. Public outrage at the case helped propel the hacking scandal to new heights in July, leading to the closure of The News of the World.
Reports last year said News International had offered a package of compensation worth some $4.8 million in that case, made up of $3.2 million to the Dowler family, with an additional payment of about $1.6 million to go to charity.
News International has so far paid out hundreds of thousands of dollars in other compensation settlements to dozens of hacking victims. But, the BBC said, more than 4,000 people have been identified by the police as possible victims of .
Accusations of illicit interception of voice mails are at the center of overlapping police, parliamentary and judicial inquiries, which are also investigating the payment of bribes to public officials at two Murdoch-owned tabloids, The Sun and the now-defunct News of the World.
The scandal spread further earlier this month when a British satellite news broadcaster, Sky News, whose parent company is partly owned by News Corporation while pursuing news coverage, the first time that such accusations had spilled into television news.
The acknowledgment came just two days after Mr. Murdoch¡¯s son James resigned as chairman of Sky¡¯s parent company, British Sky Broadcasting, or BSkyB, of which News Corporation owns around 39 percent. Company officials said there was no link between the resignation and the hacking revelations, which were made public only as a result of an inquiry by the newspaper The Guardian.
¡°We stand by these actions as editorially justified and in the public interest,¡± the head of Sky News, John Ryley, said in a statement at the time. ¡°We do not take such decisions lightly or frequently.¡±
