LONDON ¡ª Martine Aubry, a French Socialist, pondered the plight of Europe¡¯s young people. ¡°For the first time,¡± she said, ¡°parents are saying that things are going to be worse for their children. Before, they saw society as constantly improving.¡±
A commonplace of our times? Certainly.
Across the Continent, young people face bleak futures, jobless in societies whose ability to produce work or perpetuate the social safety nets on which Europe once prided itself collides increasingly with economic decline and austerity.
In Spain, more than half of young people cannot find work, official figures say. Nearly a third of the European Union¡¯s 17 million jobless are young people.
But the point about Ms. Aubry¡¯s remark was that it was made in 1993, when youth unemployment in her own country had also reached more than 23 percent and when the number of young jobless people in Spain was almost 40 percent.
In those days, too, Europe seethed with generational foreboding.
¡°European youths are growing up in a region that is undergoing radical economic change ¡ª one in which a secure job is no longer assured, where governments are cutting welfare spending, where the boom that promoted a cult of individualism has given way to a slump that permits only the survival of the fittest,¡± my colleague Alan Riding reported at the time.
His take seems equally valid almost 20 years later, suggesting, perhaps, that economic cycles propel talk of a lost generation and then, as in the early-to-late 2000s, replace the gloom with heady, bust-to-boom well-being ¡ª in ¡¯s case a wave of Potemkin prosperity, fueled by soaring house prices and personal debt.
This time, though, some factors may be more deep-rooted ¡ª at least in Britain ¡ª not simply in terms of economic cycles but also in fundamental changes in the way young people equip themselves to face the risk and perils of economic renewal.
For decades, Britain has seen itself as a postindustrial society, reliant on the provision of services to create jobs that are often vulnerable to layoffs and rapid turnover of staff, bereft of the union-backed protections of the old-time factory floor.
But in the period since Ms. Aubry spoke, perhaps the most insidious lifestyle change since the Industrial Revolution in the 19th century has overtaken a generation that may not be irretrievably ¡°lost,¡± as dystopian analyses suggest, but that has strayed into thickets of a cultural revolution that its parents cannot easily comprehend.
In short, these are the people of the screen.
Combining television, social networking sites and computer games, ¡°Britain¡¯s 11-to-15-year-olds spend about half their waking lives in front of a screen: 7.5 hours a day, an increase of 40 percent in a decade,¡± said a recent report by the conservation group the National Trust.
The figures buttressed a broader argument that Britons ¡ª particularly children ¡ª have been seized with what the report called ¡°nature deficit disorder,¡± a syndrome that cuts traditional bonds between people and their natural environment, locking them into their homes because the outside world is deemed to be so perilous.
The Internet, the television and the smartphone, in other words, have become the intermediaries between young Britons and reality.
The report insisted that its conclusions did not represent ¡°an anachronistic lament on modernity.¡±
¡°To cry out for the return of some mythical golden age would be as ineffective as it would be misguided,¡± it said. And yet, just as the parents quoted by Ms. Aubry sensed a shift in the very rhythms of 20th-century self-betterment, so the report suggested that British society is now at what Fiona Reynolds, the departing head of the National Trust, called ¡°a tipping point¡± in its approach to the natural world.
The assessment could represent a bookend to an era that began in the late 18th century when the Romantic poet William Wordsworth celebrated nature as ¡°The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul/Of all my moral being,¡± to quote from ¡°Lines Composed a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey,¡± written in 1798.
Such was industrial Britain¡¯s yearning for the outdoors that in 1932, hundreds of blue-collar workers from the mills and factories of the northwest fought bailiffs, police officers and gamekeepers in a vain effort to win access to a boggy, high plateau in the Peak District called Kinder Scout.
By contrast, the National Trust said, today¡¯s young people are cosseted by what it termed ¡°helicopter parents,¡± hovering over them to shield them from risks that include heavy traffic on the roads, the perceived ¡°stranger danger¡± of pedophiles and the dangers represented by an obsessive regard for regulations related to ¡°health and safety,¡± ostensibly designed to prevent injury from games like playing tag or the peculiarly British pursuit called conkers, using hardened chestnuts suspended on strings.
¡°Three times as many children are taken to hospital each year after falling out of bed as from falling out of trees,¡± the report said. But the real risks are ill health, obesity and a growing inability among children ¡°to assess risks to themselves and others.¡±
Of course, sitting for long periods in front of a screen is arguably an appropriate preparation for a job market that demands a good degree of eyeball-to-plasma interface ¡ª as does the writing of columns like this one.
Nonetheless, it is hard to erase baby-boomer memories of roaming free in parks and fields, loath to return home as the gloaming deepened, slipping on tree trunks, walking unsupervised to and from school, learning the sting of nettles, the barking of knees from myriad scrapes and tumbles ¡ª at least for writers like this one.
