HONG KONG ¡ª Ni Yulan, a rights advocate who was crippled by abuse in prison and was later left homeless on the streets of Beijing, was sentenced by a Chinese court on Tuesday to a new prison term of two years and eight months, an advocacy group said.
The court, in the Xicheng district of Beijing, sentenced Ms. Ni and her husband, Dong Jiqin, on charges of creating a disturbance, and Ms. Ni alone on an additional fraud charge, according to Chinese Human Rights Defenders, a group based in Hong Kong. Mr. Dong¡¯s sentence is for two years.
The couple were arrested in April 2011. Prosecutors said that Ms. Ni, who holds a law degree from University of Political Science and Law, accepted payment for giving legal advice despite having been disbarred, and that Ms. Ni and Mr. Dong failed to pay hotel bills of about $11,000, The Associated Press reported.
Ms. Ni has been jailed twice before, both times on charges of obstructing official business. In 2002, she helped residents of Xicheng fight eviction from their homes as the government was remaking Beijing for the 2008 Olympics. During her detention, she said, she was kicked and beaten for 15 hours, leaving her unable to walk. She was released after 75 days.
She was jailed again in 2008 and released in 2010, but was left homeless. Her family residence had been demolished while she was in prison, and she said the police made it difficult for her to rent an apartment or a hotel room. She and her husband camped in a donated tent at a park in Beijing, attracting much news media attention. The authorities then moved the couple to a hotel room.
Ms. Ni has described a number of instances of abuse that she experienced in prison, including an officer¡¯s urinating on her face and prison officials¡¯ taking away her crutches, forcing her to crawl from her cell to the prison workshop.
The mistreatment has left Ms. Ni frail. During her trial in December, she had to be propped up on a makeshift bed with an oxygen mask tethered to her face.
With the sentencing, the Chinese government ¡°tells the world defiantly that it has nothing but disdain for human rights, and that it treats its international and constitutional obligations merely as decorations,¡± Renee Xia, the international director for Chinese Human Rights Defenders, said in a statement posted on the organization¡¯s Web site.
In a statement released outside the Beijing court on Tuesday, the European Union said that it was deeply concerned about Ms. Ni¡¯s sentence. Because of her poor health, it said, she should be released immediately.
