SEOUL, South Korea ¡ª defied international warnings of censure and further isolation on Friday, launching a rocket that the United States and its allies called a provocative pretext for developing an intercontinental ballistic missile that might one day carry a nuclear warhead.
But in what was a major embarrassment to the North and its young new leader, the rocket disintegrated moments after the launching, and American and Japanese officials said its remnants fell harmlessly into the sea.
After hours of silence, North Korea¡¯s state-run news media announced that the satellite the rocket had been carrying ¡°failed to enter its preset orbit.¡± Scientists and technicians were ¡°looking into the cause of the failure,¡± said the terse statement from the reclusive North Korea leadership, which had trumpeted the event as a showcase of patriotic pride meant to exalt the 100th anniversary of the birthday of the country¡¯s founder, Kim Il-sung, grandfather of the new leader, Kim Jung-un. Only two days earlier, North Korea had elevated the grandson to the highest levels of state power.
It was the first time the North has publicly acknowledged a long-range missile or satellite failure.
Officials from Japan, South Korea and the United States, which had been monitoring for signs of the launching, condemned it as a belligerent act that endangered regional stability ¡ª even though it had failed. American officials said that they had planned to send to North Korea to help feed its malnourished population would be suspended.
¡°North Korea is only further isolating itself by engaging in provocative acts, and is wasting its money on weapons and propaganda displays while the North Korean people go hungry,¡± the White House press secretary, Jay Carney, said in a statement on Thursday evening, which was Friday morning in Asia. The United States, Mr. Carney said, ¡°remains vigilant in the face of North Korean provocations and is fully committed to the security of our allies in the region.¡±
The consequences of such a public relations fiasco were unclear for the young Mr. Kim or the elders who have surrounded and groomed him, and the conspicuous absence of a prompt explanation for what had gone awry deepened the mystery.
¡°Obviously, the rocket launch is pretty embarrassing for Kim Jung-un and North Korea,¡± said Tate Nurkin, a director at Jane¡¯s Strategic Advisory Service, in an e-mailed reaction. ¡°North Korea is all about ceremony and stature and grand, symbolic gestures.¡±
One Obama administration official suggested that the failure might speed the North¡¯s determination to conduct a nuclear test ¡ª the country¡¯s third ¡ª ¡°simply to show that it can.¡± Test preparations are under way, satellite photographs suggest.
A remaining unknown is whether a test would be designed to show off a new weapon made from highly enriched uranium, the newest fuel the North is experimenting with, rather than the plutonium bombs that it tested, with mixed success, in 2006 and 2009.
In Japan, government officials said the three-stage rocket, which the North had said was carrying a communications satellite, appeared to fly for more than a minute after it was launched at 7:40 a.m. local time, then broke up at an altitude of 400,000 feet and tumbled into several pieces into international waters in the sea west of the Korean Peninsula. In Washington, the Pentagon said in a statement that the first stage of the rocket fell into the sea about 103 miles west of Seoul, and the remaining stages ¡°were assessed to have failed and no debris fell on land.¡± It said the debris had never been a threat.
The launching has been politically problematic for the Obama administration, which only weeks ago completed an agreement with the North to provide food aid in return for Pyongyang¡¯s agreement to suspend uranium enrichment and refrain from test launchings of long-range missiles. The administration had portrayed the deal as a promising if fragile advance that would allow nuclear monitors back into the country after years when the nuclear program continued unchecked.
