SEOUL, South Korea ¡ª said on Tuesday that it had completed preparations to launch a satellite into orbit, as South Korea and other Asian nations told their airlines and ships to change their routes to avoid the North Korean rocket.
had previously refrained from issuing such directions while it joined its allies, particularly the United States, in urging North Korea to cancel the launching, scheduled for sometime between Thursday and Monday. They said it violated a resolution prohibiting North Korea from testing intercontinental ballistic missile technology.
But the North has remained defiant, and has placed the three-stage Unha-3 rocket at its launching pad.
¡°All the assembly and preparations of the satellite launch are done,¡± The Associated Press quoted Ryu Kum-chol, a senior North Korean space official, as saying during a news conference for visiting foreign journalists in the North Korean capital, Pyongyang.
Mr. Ryu said North Korea would not change its plans. The launching jeopardizes a recent United States agreement with North Korea in which the North agreed to suspend uranium enrichment, thereby slowing its , in return for . American officials have reported that they explicitly said during negotiations that North Korea could not launch satellites, which analysts see as a cover for testing missile technology. Such missiles could eventually be fitted to deliver .
On Tuesday, Jay Carney, the White House press secretary, said ¡°it¡¯s impossible to imagine that we would be able to follow through¡± with the food aid if North Korea moved ahead with a ¡°flagrant violation¡± of its international obligations.
Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and Susan E. Rice, the United States ambassador to the , continued to try to exert pressure on Tuesday. Mrs. Clinton said the United States and its allies were still trying to persuade North Korea to stop the launching.
¡°We believe strength and security will not come from more provocations but from North Korea living up to its commitments and obligations,¡± Mrs. Clinton said, without elaborating on what retaliatory steps the United States would consider beyond withholding the food aid promised in February. She and Japan¡¯s foreign minister, Koichiro Gemba, with whom she met Tuesday, said North Korea¡¯s plans would be the forcus of meetings of the foreign ministers of the Group of 8 nations in Washington this week. Ms. Rice said the Security Council should convene and ¡°respond credibly,¡± if the North goes ahead with its plans.
Canceling the launching, however, could put North Korea¡¯s leader, , in a difficult position at home, where he is trying to shore up his power just months after his father¡¯s death. The lofting of the satellite is timed to celebrations for the centenary of the birth of his grandfather, Kim Il-sung, the revered founding president, who was born April 15, 1912.
As North Korea looked determined to press ahead, Philippine Airlines said it would change the paths of a dozen of its flights from the United States, Japan and South Korea so that they could stay clear from the North Korean rocket¡¯s trajectory. Japan Airlines and All Nippon Airways also planned to reroute some flights, and South Korea¡¯s Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs said that it had ordered 22 Korean Air and Asiana Air flights to the Philippines to make detours between Thursday and Monday. North Korea told international aviation authorities that its rocket would blast off from its launching station near its northwestern border with China and fly southward. Its first-stage section is expected to fall in the sea about 90 nautical miles off Kunsan, a city on the South Korean west coast. The second-stage section is expected to hit the waters east of the Philippines.
The Philippines and South Korea urged fishing boats and other ships to avoid waters where rocket debris may fall.
