CARTAGENA, Colombia ¡ª arrived here on Friday for a two-day meeting with more than 30 other leaders of Western Hemisphere nations ¡ª but not before making a stop with domestic political overtones in the election battleground state of Florida, to preview the meeting¡¯s trade-and-jobs theme.
Mr. Obama¡¯s visit to the port of Tampa, where he promoted the importance of United States exports against a backdrop of cargo containers, was his second trip to Florida in a week and his seventh since he filed for re-election a year ago.
The president was eager to link his foreign travel, which holds little interest for many Americans, with the economic issues that voters do care about, and which are likely to determine the winner of the November election.
¡°I¡¯m willing to go anywhere in the world to open up new markets for American businesses,¡± Mr. Obama said in Tampa.
¡°A lot of the countries in the region are on the rise,¡± he said. ¡°In Latin America alone, over the past decade, tens of millions of people have stepped out of poverty and into the middle class. So they¡¯re now in a position to start buying American products. That means they¡¯ve got more money to spend. We want them spending money on American-made goods.¡±
Mr. Obama said 40 percent of goods leaving Tampa are bound for Latin America, and about the same percentage of total United States exports are to countries in the hemisphere, including Canada. That trade supports nearly four million American jobs, he said.
¡°Soon, there are going to be millions of new customers for American goods in South Korea, in Colombia, in Panama,¡± Mr. Obama said, citing trade agreements completed late last year with those three countries. ¡°Soon there will be new cars on the streets of Seoul that are imported from Detroit and Toledo and Chicago.¡±
Those trade pacts remain unpopular with some of the president¡¯s union allies.
Mr. Obama got in a jab at China¡¯s trade practices, which are likely to be an issue in the presidential race given the attacks on Beijing from his likely presidential rival, Mitt Romney, during the campaign for the Republican nomination.
¡°Now, one of the ways that we¡¯ve helped American businesses sell their products around the world is by calling out our competitors, making sure they¡¯re playing by the same rules,¡± Mr. Obama said. ¡°For example, we¡¯ve brought trade cases against China at nearly twice the rate as the last administration. We just brought a new case last month.¡±
The president also announced a plan to extend export-promotion services and counseling to small businesses in the United States, and to coordinate them with similar government networks in Latin American countries. Typically, government export promotion and subsidies benefit large, multinational corporations.
¡°This initiative is going to help our small businesses ¡ª Latino-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, African-American-owned businesses,¡± Mr. Obama said. All are constituencies important to his political success.
Administration officials suggested that the president had not decided on another issue of interest to American organized labor: whether Colombia has met its commitment to stop violence against unionists in that country. The pledge was a side agreement to the free-trade pact with the United States that was essential to securing union acquiescence to the pact, as well as the votes of Congressional Democrats.
This month, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., Richard L. Trumka, wrote to Mr. Obama urging him not to find that Colombia had met its obligations under the labor agreement.
¡°We¡¯re still working,¡± Mr. Obama¡¯s deputy national security adviser, Benjamin J. Rhodes, told reporters aboard on the way to Cartagena. ¡°We¡¯re hopeful that we can resolve all those issues in the near-term future.¡±
After a dinner on Friday night hosted by President Juan Manuel Santos of Colombia, the leaders of the participating countries will hold meetings on Saturday and Sunday. While Mr. Santos and other Latin American leaders also want to discuss economic issues ¡ª and to highlight the growth that has made them more partners than supplicants in their trade and investment relations with the United States ¡ª they are expected to force a discussion Mr. Obama is not eager for in an election year, on decriminalization of drugs.
Their push is based on the widespread belief that the military approach of the American-led war on drugs in the region has failed.
Administration officials, led by Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. on a recent visit to Honduras, have said the White House is willing to listen and to discuss decriminalization, although they underscored Mr. Obama¡¯s opposition.
