ISLAMABAD, Pakistan ¡ª In a rare show of unity, the government and opposition joined on Thursday to present the United States with a list of stringent demands, including an immediate end to drone strikes, that were cast in uncompromising words but could pave the way for a reopening of supply lines through the country.
After two and a half weeks of contentious negotiations, the main parties agreed on a four-page parliamentary resolution that, in addition to the drone demand, called on the Obama administration to apologize for American airstrikes in November that killed 24 Pakistani soldiers. It declared that ¡°no overt or covert operations inside Pakistan shall be permitted¡± ¡ª a broad reference that could be interpreted to include all C.I.A. operations.
But on the issue of NATO supply lines, the resolution specified only that arms and ammunition cannot be transported through Pakistan, opening the door to the resumed delivery of critical Afghan war supplies like food and fuel for the first time since the November airstrikes. And in practice, arms and ammunition were rarely, if ever, transported in convoys through Pakistan.
¡°Today¡¯s resolution will enrich your respect and dignity; I assure you that we will get these enforced in letter and spirit,¡± Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani told Parliament, although he stopped short of declaring when the supply route would reopen.
¡°We are a responsible nation,¡± he said. ¡°We know our obligations as well as the importance of the United States.¡±
A spokeswoman for the State Department, Victoria Nuland, praised the ¡°seriousness¡± of the Parliament¡¯s debate and added: ¡°We seek a relationship with Pakistan that is enduring, strategic and more clearly defined. We look forward to discussing these policy recommendations.¡±
Analysts said the resolution, which is essentially nonbinding but establishes a framework for private talks between senior American and Pakistani officials in the coming weeks, signals a new, more pragmatic chapter in relations between the two countries.
¡°This makes it easier for the government to negotiate with the U.S.,¡± said Hasan Askari Rizvi, a defense expert based in Lahore. ¡°That is why the government agreed to the opposition demand on drones.¡±
Still, the demand for an ¡°immediate cessation of drone strikes¡± has no easy solution. In 2008 Parliament also demanded an end to drone strikes, only for the C.I.A. to continue attacking Taliban and Al Qaeda targets in the tribal belt along the Afghan border.
The Obama administration considers the operations vital to disrupting terrorist and insurgent networks as well as protecting American troops at war in . For Pakistani politicians, however, drones have become a red-line domestic political issue because of public outrage.
The opposition, led by ¡¯s Pakistan Muslim League-N party, agreed to back Thursday¡¯s resolution in Parliament only if it contained unequivocal language about drones. The government agreed to the language because it needs broad cross-party support to negotiate a reopening of NATO supply lines ¡ª a measure that is privately considered necessary by the political and military leadership, but which enjoys little support among the general public.
¡°Now two things can happen,¡± Mr. Askari Rizvi said. ¡°If the drone strikes continue, it will embarrass the government. The other option is for the U.S. and Pakistan to evolve a new framework for the use of .¡±
Among other measures, the resolution calls for the cessation of unauthorized American military ingress onto Pakistani soil, even for ¡°hot pursuit.¡±
It states that ¡°no private security contractors or intelligence operatives shall be allowed¡± ¡ª a clear reference to longstanding popular fears that private security contractors are infiltrating the country on behalf of the C.I.A.
The resolution stressed that no verbal agreement regarding national security should be entered into by the government and all such earlier agreements ¡°shall cease to have effect forthwith¡± ¡ª seemingly a reference to the way military deals have been made with the United States in the past. It repeated Pakistan¡¯s desire to obtain a civil nuclear deal from the United States, like the one awarded to India in 2005.
Other clauses dealt with broader foreign policy issues and urged the government to deepen its strategic partnership with China as well as strengthening relations with Russia and the European Union.
It urged Pakistan to actively pursue a gas pipeline project with Iran, despite opposition by the United States.
Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan, the leader of the opposition in the National Assembly, said that all political parties wanted to have good relations with the United States but that ¡°it cannot be an imbalanced relationship.¡±
¡°You cannot have a relationship which is tilted toward one country,¡± he said.
