MANILA ¡ª Tawi-Tawi, a remote island province, has white sandy beaches and stunning views, but selling it as a tourist destination has proved challenging for Philippine officials.
The island¡¯s pristine waters, prehistoric caves and mountain lookouts, it turns out, lie in the vicinity of fierce battles between rebel groups and the Philippine military.
Kidnappings are a recurring problem on Tawi-Tawi, and clan warfare, beheadings and roadside bombs are all too common on the surrounding islands in the southern . Nonetheless, Gov. Sadikul Sahali and local tourism officials are laying out the welcome mat, with a new promotional campaign aimed at trumpeting the charms of Tawi-Tawi and other nearby isles.
National tourism officials are opposed to foreigners visiting the area because of the dangers. A national tourism , with the slogan ¡°It¡¯s More Fun in the Philippines,¡± has been something of a sensation on the Internet, though, and users have appropriated the slogan on social media sites to celebrate ¡ª and mock ¡ª what constitutes ¡°fun¡± in some areas. One such image under the heading ¡°Vacation. It¡¯s More Fun in the Philippines¡± shows a kidnapped couple flanked by masked, armed men in Mindanao, the easternmost island in the Philippines.
¡°If you are in central and western Mindanao, you should leave immediately,¡± states a recent travel advisory from the Australian government to its citizens.
¡°If, despite our very strong advice against travel, you decide to visit central or western Mindanao,¡± it added, ¡°you should put in place robust measures to ensure your personal security, seek professional security advice and take out kidnapping insurance.¡±
The United States, Britain and many other countries have had similar travel warnings for more than a decade.
It is no surprise, given the recent history of the area around Tawi-Tawi, that visitors are urged to arrange security along with their tour packages.
On nearby Jolo Island in February, Philippine Air Force jets dropped two bombs that killed more than a dozen rebels, including top leaders of a regional terrorist network with links to Al Qaeda, military officials said.
A nearby island, Basilan, is a stronghold for the top terrorist organization in the Philippines, Abu Sayyaf.
Just beyond Basilan, in Zamboanga Sibugay Province, Warren Richard Rodwell, a 53-year-old Australian, has been held captive since his abduction on Dec. 5. In July, a vacationing American, Gerfa Yeatts Lunsmann, her 14-year-old son and her 19-year-old Filipino nephew were kidnapped in a coastal area of Zamboanga City. All three are now free, and Ms. Lunsmann and her son have returned to the United States. No one has confirmed or denied rumors that ransoms were paid.
Despite the warnings, two European birdwatchers decided to visit Tawi-Tawi in hopes of seeing the extremely rare . They were kidnapped on Feb. 1 and remain in captivity. The violence and kidnappings in the south pose a significant problem for Philippine tourism officials.
¡°The Philippines remains an ideal destination, with foreign individuals and groups continuing to arrive,¡± the Department of Tourism said in a statement shortly after the birdwatchers were kidnapped. ¡°So far, no cancellations have been made.¡±
In Bongao, on Tawi-Tawi, the desk clerk at the Beachside Inn, Nur Uddin, said by telephone that foreigners continued to arrive, although not very often. ¡°If you come here, you should hire a security guard to make sure you are safe,¡± he said.
Salvacion Pescadera, a provincial tourism officer, said the kidnapping of the birdwatchers was an isolated case that, she said, occurred because they had not sought security clearance from the Tourism Department before visiting a remote area. She said that her office coordinated with the local police to provide security for visitors. ¡°You¡¯ll be in good hands,¡± she said.
