MYITKYINA, Myanmar ¡ª In the fog-swathed mountains north of here toward the border with China, more than 700 American airmen, flying cumbersome cargo planes loaded with war supplies, perished in the last stages of .
Now, as relations improve between the United States and Myanmar, then known as Burma, the Pentagon is seeking permission from the Burmese to recover the remains of the lost Americans scattered over some of the toughest terrain in Southeast Asia.
The spots where the planes crashed are so well hidden that even on a bus journey along part of the Ledo Road that American forces hacked through the jungle, residents pointed to the horizon, saying, ¡°Over there,¡± or ¡°Far from here,¡± when asked for exact locations of the crash sites.
Historically, the United States has tried to repair relations with former enemies by requesting permission to recover the remains of Americans listed as or prisoners of war. That practice allows two opposing militaries to meet over humanitarian issues, rather than security matters, and offers Americans an opportunity to enter previously forbidden territory that over time may become more welcoming.
Some of the first official postwar contacts with Vietnam developed a decade after the end of the fighting when the American and Vietnamese militaries began tentative cooperation that gradually strengthened as the search for missing American soldiers progressed.
The Pentagon had reached out to North Korea for help in recovering the remains of American soldiers missing in action from the Korean War, but last month after North Korea announced its intention to launch the rocket that Friday.
A deputy assistant secretary of defense, Robert Newberry, visited Myanmar in February to start negotiations for operations that would allow American military officials and forensic experts to excavate crash sites, and carry any remains discovered back to the United States.
Efforts in 2003 and 2004 yielded only modest results and stirred some anger.
On two separate missions, American teams began the search for remains at crash sites around Myitkyina, but made little headway before Myanmar¡¯s political climate soured and they had to leave, said Johnie E. Webb Jr., deputy to the commander of the of the Department of Defense in Hawaii.
The headquarters for renewed operations could well be here again in Myitkyina, the town that American forces led by Gen. Joseph W. Stilwell captured after mastering some of the most grueling territory of the war in the summer of 1944, Mr. Webb said.
The fight to take Myitkyina, now a bustling commercial center with growing Chinese influence, was undertaken, in large part, to help the American airmen who had to fly far to the north to evade Japanese artillery clustered around the town. But the more northern route took the planes over the Himalayas ¡ª or ¡°The Hump,¡± as it was known during the war.
With only rudimentary navigation equipment in the C-47 cargo planes, the pilots essentially flew by the seat of their pants. An estimated 180 American aircraft and about 730 airmen were lost, Mr. Webb said.
The cargo planes, with crews of two or three, ferried supplies from allied bases in India to China, where General Stilwell was trying to persuade an obstinate Gen. Chiang Kai-shek to fight the Japanese rather than the Communist forces of Mao Zedong. American bombers, with crews of 9 to 11 men, sent on missions against the Japanese also crashed into the jungle.
Howa Zau Gam, 84, a member of the Kachin ethnic group in Myanmar, fought alongside the Americans against the Japanese. In an interview at his home in Myitkyina, he said he would be happy to assist in a renewed recovery effort.
¡°It is my duty to help because the Americans liberated us from the Japanese and the British colonials,¡± he said, in the flawless English that he used as a young man when he gathered intelligence and interpreted for the American ground forces.
A certificate on Mr. Howa¡¯s living room wall, signed by Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, noted that he had been among 400 Kachin rangers who had fought 700 Japanese soldiers in a 12-hour battle. The Japanese, according to the citation, were supported by artillery, but the Kachin killed 281 of the enemy, losing only seven of their own fighters.
The attempts in 2003 and 2004 at finding the remains of some of the downed airmen were fraught with problems, Mr. Howa said.
Wrecked planes were found at three or four sites, but the local workers who had guided the Americans there were underpaid by a Burmese middleman and became disgruntled, hindering the efficiency and success of the operations, Mr. Howa said. In one instance, the Americans were led astray by the guides and sifted sand around a wrecked plane that had already been examined at the end of the war, he said.
