DUBAI ¡ª Majied Qasem, a Jordanian entrepreneur, waited three years to arrange outside funding for his start-up company, , an Arabic social media and content-sharing platform. He finally, and successfully, took the plunge last September, eight months after the Arab Spring uprisings erupted in the region.
The company now has more than 35 million page views per month, with growth in traffic stimulated by online debates about a wide range of political and social issues, says Mr. Qasem, 40.
Like many entrepreneurs in the Arab world, he believes the region¡¯s political and economic upheaval has helped rather than hurt his business, by creating fresh demand for his products, persuading investors to seek new opportunities and making governments more sympathetic to the needs of start-ups.
¡°Investors historically targeted well-established companies that had very low risk and provided high returns,¡± he said in an interview. ¡°But now, after the Arab Spring, investors are pouring the same amounts of money into multiple smaller companies, betting a few of them will see a remarkable success.¡±
¡°We¡¯re seeing unprecedented amounts of money paid by investors, governments and development funds to seed start-ups and small firms,¡± Mr. Qasem added.
The Arab Spring¡¯s economic disruption continues to be felt. and are coping with waves of industrial unrest as they seek to rebuild their tourism industries and lure back foreign investors. Libya is recovering from a civil war, while sectarian unrest still weighs on Bahrain¡¯s economy. Several countries, including , have expanded welfare spending to try to buy social peace, undermining government finances.
But on the positive side, conditions for entrepreneurs are in some ways improving, officials and businessmen say. Previously, start-up companies were sometimes discouraged by authoritarian regimes eager to protect the interests of small groups of privileged business cronies. Now they are more often welcomed as tools to create jobs.
Arif Naqvi, group chief executive of Abraaj Capital ¡ª the Middle East¡¯s largest private equity firm with more than $6 billion under management ¡ª said that one of the most dramatic changes in the region¡¯s economic thinking had been the realization that smaller companies could be a better engine for growth than big state-linked ones, because they could create more jobs.
¡°I¡¯m a great believer that the Arab Spring has more in common with the Occupy Wall Street movement, the street riots in London, and the food riots in Mumbai than it had with political change,¡± Mr. Naqvi said.
¡°Mohamed Bouazizi wasn¡¯t sending a political message when he set himself on fire. He wanted to work, to live and to survive,¡± he added, referring to the Tunisian vegetable seller whose suicide in December 2010 triggered the regional upheaval.
The difficulty of obtaining loans from risk-averse Arab banks, which often focus on serving large clients, has long been a major obstacle to setting up businesses in the region. Foreign aid donors like the European Union, the United States and multilateral lending bodies have stepped up efforts to fill the gap since last year.
Mouayed Makhlouf, regional director for International Finance Corp., a unit of the World Bank, said the I.F.C. had invested $2.2 billion in the Middle East and North African region since January 2011, becoming a significant source of capital for private companies.
¡°Back in 2005 we were doing in the range of $300 million in MENA,¡± he said, using the acronym for the region. ¡°We¡¯re now allocating more than $2 billion a year.¡± The money was mostly going to small and midsize businesses, he said, with investment opportunities in Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt, Iraq, Tunisia and Morocco.
While endorsing the idea of developing smaller companies, governments in oil-importing Arab countries have mostly lacked the resources to provide them with more access to funding. Distracted, moreover, by political change, legislatures in those countries have been slow to do things that would help start-ups, such as revising tax and labor laws.
But governments in the Gulf states, seeing unemployment as a potential source of social unrest, are paying more attention to funding smaller companies. Last year, the state-affiliated Saudi Industrial Development Fund began guaranteeing as much as 80 percent of commercial bank loans to small companies, up from 50 percent previously.
Increased government support is in turn encouraging more of the region¡¯s private investors to consider funding start-ups, businessmen say.
