ATHENS ¡ª ¡¯s interim prime minister, , called for snap elections on Wednesday, opening the way for a contest that promises to be the most fiercely fought in decades but which might not yield a definitive result, potentially putting the debt-racked country¡¯s international bailout plan in jeopardy.
In a televised address to the nation on Wednesday night, Mr. Papademos said he had gained the approval of President Karolos Papoulias to dissolve Parliament and go to elections on May 6.
¡°The current government has completed the key task that it was assigned,¡± he said. ¡°A new government, with a fresh popular mandate, will be tasked with continuing the effort to reconstruct the economy.¡±
The decision had been widely anticipated, as had the date for the elections. But before it could be formalized, Parliament had to approve an assortment of legislation promised to creditors ¡ª to liberalize the job market, cut red tape and reduce state spending.
In a cabinet meeting earlier Wednesday, Mr. Papademos said the main goals of his five-month administration ¡ª to secure a second bailout for Greece and ¡°avert the risk of immediate bankruptcy¡± ¡ª had been achieved. The focus now was on putting in place necessary changes, he said, adding that ¡°the dissolution of Parliament should not mean the dissolution of government.¡±
One priority is to complete, ideally by April 20, a plan to recapitalize Greek banks, which suffered heavy losses last month in a bond-swap program with the government, the prime minister said. He also said the new government would face the tough task of drafting further measures by June, an apparent reference to $14.4 billion in cuts for the next two years being sought by Greece¡¯s international lenders.
The elections will be the first in Greece since the debt crisis erupted in late 2009, setting the stage for two multibillion dollar foreign bailouts. Those efforts, however, have failed to stop rising unemployment, now at 21 percent, deepening poverty and growing social unrest. Public anger has been swelling against the politicians who approved austerity measures and are perceived as having created the dysfunctional state that created the conditions for the debt crisis.
Opinion polls show that the two parties in the interim government have lost major support. A poll conducted by the firm Public Issue for Skai television and the Kathimerini daily newspaper showed the conservative New Democracy party holding on to its lead with 19 percent and the Socialists edging up to 14.5 percent. The Coalition of the Radical Left (known as Syriza) would garner 13 percent in elections, the survey showed, with the more moderate Democratic Left winning 12 percent and the Communist Party 11 percent.
A new center-right party called Independent Greeks, which opposes the government¡¯s austerity drive, is shown to be polling at 11 percent.
Some smaller parties were teetering on the 3 percent threshold for entering Parliament, given the survey¡¯s margin of error of plus or minus 2.9 percentage points. The poll, conducted by telephone, surveyed 1,226 people nationwide from April 3 to 9.
Some expect that the elections will produce a hung Parliament and require a second round of voting. ¡°People will express their anger and grievances in the first vote, then in the second they will be more realistic,¡± said Takis Michas, a political analyst.
