TSHIKOTA, South Africa ¡ª When she moved from a cramped room in a boardinghouse to her very own bungalow on a speck of land here last year, Jeanette Munyai became one of the millions of South Africans given a decent home by an ambitious government program inaugurated at the end of apartheid.
House-proud for the first time in her life, she immediately planted corn, pumpkins and tomatoes on a patch of her yard. Only two things were missing: running water and electricity.
¡°They told us water and light was coming, but we are still using the bush as a toilet,¡± she said. ¡°We are waiting.¡±
Ms. Munyai and her neighbors are unlikely to get water or electricity any time soon. The provincial government is broke, and the dry pipes and powerless plugs have for her and many others come to symbolize the heavy toll graft and cronyism have taken in this impoverished northern province.
Corruption has long bedeviled South Africa, but the crisis here in Limpopo Province has pushed the common practice of doling out overstuffed government contracts to people with friends in high places to its logical conclusion: bankruptcy.
Provincial officials overspent their budget by an estimated $250 million, much of it on questionable ¡ª or blatantly fraudulent ¡ª government payments and contracts with private businesses enjoying close ties to the politicians leading the province.
¡°There is evidence emerging that some of these service providers are politically connected, and many of them may have gotten those tenders in dubious kinds of ways,¡± said Kenneth Brown, deputy director general in the Treasury Department.
Dan Sebabi, leader of Limpopo¡¯s branch of Cosatu, the powerful coalition of trade unions that is allied with the governing African National Congress, put it more bluntly.
¡°You have leaders who are politicians by day, businessmen by night,¡± he said.
Graft and wasteful spending have sapped the government¡¯s ability to tackle inequality. Only 3 of 39 government departments were pronounced clean in audits by South Africa¡¯s auditor general last year. .
¡°We thought that South Africa could be different from the rest of the countries that came before us on the African continent,¡± said Gilbert Kganyago, leader of Limpopo¡¯s branch of the South African Communist Party. ¡°But at the rate that things are happening, we have actually caught up to the African scenario quite more quickly than we might have thought.¡±
A recent report by the auditor general found that in the last fiscal year, government officials and their relatives won $15 million in contracts for work with the Defense Department, the Tax Service and the Department of Home Affairs, among others. And that does not come close to accounting for the many millions of dollars quietly awarded to friends and other associates, experts note.
Almost from the moment it was elected to govern in 1994 after decades of fighting to end apartheid, the A.N.C. has struggled with allegations of graft. Jacob Zuma, the current president, took office only after amid accusations of prosecutorial misconduct.
But corruption has become so entrenched that it is eating away at the nation¡¯s soul, said Zwelinzima Vavi, secretary general of Cosatu, in to announce the formation of an antigraft organization, .
¡°We are moving towards a society in which the morality of our revolutionary movement ¡ª selflessness, service to the people and caring for the poor and vulnerable ¡ª is being threatened,¡± Mr. Vavi said. ¡°If we do nothing it will be swept away by a tidal wave of a culture of individualism, a ¡®me first¡¯ attitude and to hell with everyone else. Some argue that we are already a society where only the fittest survive and dog eats dog.¡±
Corruption is a particularly serious problem in provincial governments, which are responsible for delivering many of the services needed by the poor. Many powerful regional politicians use their offices to enrich their friends, forming a coterie of wealthy elites reminiscent of the tribal chieftains the apartheid government used to administer the tiny, nominally independent bantustans where blacks were forced to live.
Limpopo has the nation¡¯s second-highest proportion of people living in poverty ¡ª 62 percent, according to the . The average unemployment rate for the province is 40 percent, but it is much higher for blacks and young people.
Signs of waste and fraud are everywhere. Pipes that were supposed to bring clean drinking water to parched, impoverished communities were laid improperly and burst, requiring the whole job to be done again, according to local officials.
