SEOUL, South Korea ¡ª President ¡¯s governing party managed to keep its majority in Parliament after South Koreans voted Wednesday, a result that is likely to bolster the position of its expected presidential nominee.
With Mr. Lee¡¯s government reeling from corruption scandals implicating his former aides, Park Geun-hye took over the party leadership early this year and led its election campaign.
The governing New Frontier Party won 152 races for the 300-seat Parliament, according to the National Election Commission.
The liberal opposition Democratic United Party clinched 127 seats. Its coalition partner, the left-leaning United Progressive Party, won 13.
The results were disappointing for the coalition, which had sought a majority in the National Assembly to pressure Mr. Lee to tame South Korea¡¯s big businesses and soften his policy on North Korea. But they were better than expected for New Frontier and Ms. Park.
New Frontier currently controls 60 percent of the seats in the Assembly but had feared a crushing defeat following the scandals.
The election results also saved Washington a potential headache: an opposition-dominated South Korean Parliament that would have demanded a renegotiation of a free trade agreement the United States has with Seoul.
¡°This election is largely a referendum on President Lee¡¯s government,¡± said Kang Won-taek, a political scientist at Seoul National University. ¡°But Park Geun-hye has risked her political career on this election.¡±
Ms. Park, a daughter of President Park Chung-hee, who was assassinated by his spy chief in 1979, has been waiting for her second chance in the presidential poll in December. She lost her party¡¯s presidential nomination race to Mr. Lee in 2007.
Mr. Lee¡¯s government has been struggling with corruption scandals implicating his former aides and a widespread discontent over the gap between the rich and poor, and over what many consider an unbridled expansion of conglomerates at the expense of smaller firms under the president¡¯s administration.
When the party¡¯s popularity hit bottom early this year, Ms. Park came to its rescue. She has since sought to revamp its image by changing its name to New Frontier, keeping her distance from the unpopular Mr. Lee and replacing 41 percent of the party¡¯s current lawmakers in nominations for Wednesday¡¯s election. The party¡¯s level of support has been climbing back up.
New Frontier sought to consolidate its conservative base by highlighting the nuclear and missile threats from North Korea. It depicted its liberal opponents as trying to appease and undermine ¡¯s alliance with the United States by demanding the renegotiation ¡ª and even the abrogation ¡ª of the trade deal with Washington. Opposition parties also argued against the construction of a naval base on the southern island of Jeju, which they suspected would be used by the American Navy and would raise tensions in the region.
Meanwhile, the opposition failed to translate the widespread antigovernment sentiments into a landslide victory. It alienated people with its own bribery scandals and vote-fixing accusations during its primaries. Analysts said that many moderates walked away because of the party¡¯s ideologically driven stance on the free trade agreement, which was first negotiated when the liberals were in power in 2007 and went into effect in March. The Jeju base project was also started under the liberal government of the late President Roh Moo-hyun.
The liberals¡¯ about-face ¡°allowed the conservatives to attack them as untrustworthy,¡± said Kim Neung-gou, the lead analyst at Polinews, a Web site dedicated to covering domestic politics.
The Democratic United Party acknowledged a defeat.
¡°We are sorry we have disappointed the people,¡± said the campaign official, Park Sun-sook, during a news conference. ¡°We will reflect upon what today¡¯s results teach us and will try to be reborn as a party that people can depend upon.¡±
During the elections, Democratic United threatened to abolish the trade deal unless Washington agreed to a renegotiation. It had previously been reluctant to go that far, and its shifting stance illustrated how much the main opposition party was beholden to the far-left United Progressive and its policies ahead of Wednesday¡¯s election and the presidential contest in December.
Ahead of the parliamentary polls, the two formed a strategic coalition, selecting single candidates for each district to prevent vote-splitting. United Progressive also demands special taxes for business conglomerates and universal welfare, and tends to regard South Korea¡¯s alliance with Washington as biased in favor of the Americans.
Both Democratic United and United Progressive remained vocal critics of Mr. Lee¡¯s hard-line policy on North Korea, maintaining that it raised tensions on the peninsula. They prefer engaging North Korea despite the North¡¯s nuclear activities.
