MOMBASA, Kenya ¡ª South Sudanese officials said on Wednesday that their forces had taken control of a contested town in an oil-rich area along the border with , ¡°repulsing and pursuing¡± Sudanese armed forces in the latest battle between two countries that are edging toward outright war.
seceded from Sudan last year after decades of conflict, leaving a number of contested strategic areas and a landscape of residual tensions. Unresolved arguments over nationality, oil revenue and the status of contested border regions have steadily crept to the forefront of relations between the two nations, displacing the reconciliatory air during the south¡¯s independence last year.
Since then, the warm words have dissipated, revealing two nations that do not trust each other, yet rely on the same oil to power their economies. Sudan accuses South Sudan of supporting rebel insurgencies in its territory. The landlocked south , which is pumped through Sudan for export.
In recent weeks, the oil dispute has , with the two nations around the border. And on Wednesday, the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, spoke directly with the South Sudanese president, Salva Kiir Mayardit, urging an end to the fighting and a presidential summit meeting to ease tensions.
In the latest skirmish, South Sudan¡¯s minister of information, Barnaba Marial Benjamin, said that two brigades of Sudanese troops along with tanks had attacked South Sudanese positions outside the contested town of Heglig, leaving the town itself ¡°abandoned¡± and allowing the south¡¯s forces to gain control of it.
¡°They attacked us first,¡± Mr. Marial said. ¡°But we managed to push them out.¡±
South Sudanese officials would not confirm whether its forces would stay in Heglig, but they said they were not looking for war.
¡°There are many other areas that need dialogue,¡± Mr. Marial said, referring in part, he said, to Abyei, a contested region between the two countries.
¡°We are not for war,¡± Mr. Marial continued. ¡°We will not cross into their territory one inch.¡±
But Sudan¡¯s government spokesman, Rabie A. Atti, was less encouraging. Asked whether Sudan and South Sudan were at war, Mr. Atti replied, ¡°Yes, exactly.¡±
