LILLE, France ¡ª It was in this kitschy, faded and now infamous hotel, replete with fake flowers, colonnades and gold-plated statues, on a street lined with children¡¯s stores, a church and a marriage counselor, that prosecutors say the elite of this northern city used to gather for sex. Today, the H?tel Carlton de Lille is known around the world for having sheltered prominent businessmen, remorseful Freemasons and Belgian prostitutes, many of them linked to the onetime favorite candidate for the French presidency, .
Mr. Strauss-Kahn was charged last month with ¡°aggravated procurement in an organized gang,¡± which lawyers said was the legal term for pimping, over his alleged involvement in a prostitution ring that originally operated at the Carlton. The ring, prosecutors said, arranged sex parties for businessmen and various hangers-on here, in Paris and even in Washington, where Mr. Strauss-Kahn then worked as managing director of the International Monetary Fund.
Eight others were charged last October, including the Carlton¡¯s owner, director and head of public relations, as well as two businessmen who are friends of Mr. Strauss-Kahn. They all have been released pending further investigation and a possible trial.
¡°Mr. Strauss-Kahn never went to the Carlton,¡± said a person close to the investigation who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the delicate nature of the case. ¡°But he played a prominent role in the ring.¡±
Mr. Strauss-Kahn faced charges of sexual assault, later dropped, in a highly publicized case in New York last year. He is under judicial orders here not to talk to the news media, and he has denied the charges. His lawyers have said that he participated in sex parties but did not know that the young women involved were prostitutes or paid.
¡°I dare you to distinguish between a prostitute and a naked society woman,¡± his lawyer, Henri Leclerc, told Europe 1 radio in December. In recent testimony, since leaked, Mr. Strauss-Kahn conceded that he referred to the women in cellphone text messages as ¡°equipment¡± and said that perhaps ¡°I was na?ve¡± about why the young women were there. He said he never asked them about their working lives.
In another text message sent to one of his acquaintances from Lille, Mr. Strauss-Kahn wrote, ¡°Do you want to discover a new dirty night club in Madrid with me (and some equipment)?¡± In another message sent to the same friend in 2009, Mr. Strauss-Kahn wrote, ¡°I¡¯m bringing a girl to the nightclubs of Vienna on Thursday, May 14. Would you like to come with a ¡®demoiselle?¡¯?¡±
In Lille, a business hub close to the Belgian border that is not exactly known for its nightclubbing, the news of a prostitution ring at the Carlton came as a shock. This is a city whose mayor is Martine Aubry, the head of the Socialist Party and an ally of Mr. Strauss-Kahn. And many residents admitted that they could no longer pass the hotel without thinking of him.
¡°We have all been extremely surprised,¡± said Christian, the owner of a neighborhood watering hole. ¡°If there were prostitutes at the Carlton, everyone here would have known it.¡± But of course the police say there were, and the hotel, in its brochure, boasted of its ¡°charm and discretion¡± and its ¡°soundproof apartments.¡±
With its large suites, marble bathrooms and furniture in the style of Louis XVI, the hotel, which calls itself the best in northern France, is considered a landmark in Lille. It is said to attract mainly Anglo-Saxon tourists and businessmen, but previous guests also included Pink Floyd; the former dictator of the Central African Republic, Jean-B¨¦del Bokassa; and the French singer Johnny Hallyday.
Christian did not wish to give his surname because like many other shop owners in the area, he was asked by the police not to comment on the case.
Even employees of the Carlton claimed that they had never heard of prostitution at the hotel. ¡°We are victims of all this,¡± said a manager at the Carlton, who also did not wish to give his name. He admitted, though, that the hotel had lost customers after the scandal, and a person close to the investigation said that the directors of the hotel had considered changing its name.
Notoriety can be a selling point, however. The other day, two women stood at the entrance, smiling, laughing and taking snapshots of themselves in front of the hotel. ¡°I¡¯ll send the pictures to my colleagues. They¡¯ll laugh!¡± said Fran?oise Tissot, 62, a civil servant from Lyon who was spending the weekend with her sister.
Mrs. Tissot said the Carlton was not as fancy as she had imagined. It looked to her more like a Mercure ¡ª the French equivalent of a midlevel Marriott ¡ª than a four-star hotel, she said.
She also thought there was something false about Mr. Strauss-Kahn, too, she said. ¡°Mr. Strauss-Kahn pretended he was a Socialist, but he was even richer than any right-wing person.¡±
Employees at the tourism office here said they had been sickened by the extensive news media presence around the hotel, which has also frightened away some visitors.
¡°We¡¯ve had phone calls from tourists asking if the hotel was still a respectable place to stay,¡± said Bruno Cappelle, a press officer at the tourism office in Lille. ¡°I told them not to worry, that they wouldn¡¯t bump into any prostitutes.¡±
