KHARTOUM, Sudan (Reuters) ¡ª Hundreds of South Sudanese were stranded at the Khartoum airport in Sudan on Monday after being denied permission to board their flights to the south in a dispute over their legal status.
The unclear legal status for South Sudanese in Sudan is one of many unresolved issues between the former foes since the South gained independence last July under a peace agreement.
Sudan has ruled out dual citizenship for more than 500,000 southerners who have lived in the north in Sudan for decades and started treating them as foreigners on Monday after the end of a grace period.
Until Sunday, boarding for flights to the southern capital, Juba, had been conducted at the domestic terminal without passport controls. But many are now stuck in limbo, because has failed to open an embassy in Khartoum that can issue passports.
At the airport, hundreds of South Sudanese tried checking into their flights to Juba early on Monday but officials denied them entry.
¡°They need passports to board flights,¡± a Sudanese police officer said inside the terminal.
¡°We don¡¯t know what to do now,¡± said one young woman, sitting next to a pile of suitcases and plastic bags outside the terminal¡¯s heavily guarded front gate.
The presidents of the two countries had planned to sign agreements last week to allow citizens free residency, but Sudan called off the meeting after border fighting broke out.
With almost no passengers to check in, the state-owned Sudan Airways and other local carriers suspended their Juba flights.
¡°We are ready to fly but wait for a political decision,¡± said an official at Sudan Airways.
The Sudanese Foreign Ministry could not be reached for comment.
About 500 South Sudanese lined up outside the embassy but were unable to get passports or temporary travel documents because the embassy was not yet fully functional.
More than 370,000 southerners, who are mostly Christians or animists, have left Sudan for home since October 2010. Tens of thousands more are now packing up, fearing that they no longer have a future in the mainly Muslim north.
President Omar Hassan al-Bashir has said Sudan will adopt an Islamic constitution, and other Sudanese officials have said the country needs to cut down on foreign workers to create jobs to fight an economic crisis.
Tensions erupted into direct clashes in disputed border regions last month, prompting the United Nations, the United States and other countries to warn of the possibility that a full-blown conflict could break out again.
On Monday, Mr. Bashir called on South Sudan to halt aid to rebel groups north of the shared border, saying security was crucial to resolving disputes.
Both sides are also arguing over how much South Sudan should pay to export crude oil through Sudan, prompting the South to halt its entire output to stop Sudan from seizing oil in lieu of ¡°unpaid fees.¡±
They also need to mark their 1,200-mile border and agree on security for the frontier regions, where they accuse each other of backing rebels in their territory.
The African Union managed to bring them to the negotiating table last week after the border fighting, but talks were adjourned with no progress.
