BEIRUT, Lebanon ¡ª A fragile cease-fire negotiated by the special envoy prevailed in most of on Thursday, the first vaguely optimistic signal in months in that nation¡¯s bloody antigovernment uprising. But some deadly clashes were reported and activists said areas that had been riven by violence remained under virtual martial law, with tank deployments, armed checkpoints and rooftop snipers.
diplomats said they were encouraged by the apparent adherence to the cease-fire on its first day by President Bashar al-Assad¡¯s government and his opponents in the conflict, but emphasized that the government had yet to make good on its pledges under the plan to withdraw troops and heavy weapons from major cities.
They said the true test would come on Friday, the traditional day of protest, when demonstrators possibly emboldened by the cease-fire plan¡¯s provision for peaceful demonstrations were expected to pour into the streets.
¡°I am encouraged by reports that the situation in Syria is relatively quiet and that the cessation of hostilities appears to be holding,¡± Mr. Annan, the joint special envoy for the United Nations and the Arab League, said in a statement. ¡°Syria is apparently experiencing a rare moment of calm on the ground.¡±
But Mr. Annan and others, including Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of the United Nations, expressed concern about the Syrian government¡¯s history of reneged commitments during the conflict, which has left more than 9,000 people dead since it began in March 2011.
¡°The onus is on the government of Syria to prove that their words will be matched by their deeds at this time,¡± Mr. Ban said in Geneva after conferring with Mr. Annan.
The United States, which has led an effort in the West to isolate Mr. Assad and force his resignation, reacted cautiously to word that the cease-fire had survived its first day. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton called it ¡°an important step¡± but emphasized that Syria must do more to comply with the peace plan. She also said the United States would continue supporting opponents of Mr. Assad, although it is not supplying them with weapons.
At the United Nations, Syria¡¯s ambassador, Bashar Jaafari, called his government¡¯s adherence to the cease-fire a vindication of its oft-stated commitment to end the conflict. ¡°The Syrian government has ended the violence on its side,¡± he told reporters. ¡°We expect those who have influence over the armed groups to do the same.¡±
The Security Council was working on a draft resolution to authorize deployment of cease-fire monitors in Syria, after Mr. Annan briefed Council members by private video link.
The exiled Syrian National Council opposition, which is seeking the overthrow of Mr. Assad, said there were reports of raids and arrests in some suburbs of Damascus.
Anti-Assad activists and witnesses interviewed inside Syria itself largely corroborated the government¡¯s assertion that its forces had ceased the barrages of artillery shelling and rocket fire in major cities of resistance like Homs, Hama and Idlib. But the Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, an opposition group with a network of contacts inside Syria, reported that 11 people had died in clashes and that the number of checkpoints, soldiers and security men had increased in many towns and cities.
For its part, Syria¡¯s state-run SANA news agency said at least one army officer was killed and more than two dozen were wounded by a roadside bombing near Aleppo, for which it blamed armed terrorist groups, its term for armed activists, including the Free Syrian Army, consisting of military deserters and others who want to topple Mr. Assad.
In Damascus, a large number of security men were patrolling the city¡¯s main squares and mosques. One 25-year-old Damascus resident from the neighborhood of Rukin Adeen, who identified himself only by his first name, Anas, to avoid retribution, said he was highly skeptical that the cease-fire would hold.
¡°I am sure that the Assad regime will lie and find many pretexts to attack us,¡± he said.
