CAIRO ¡ª The Egyptian election authorities eliminated three of the country¡¯s leading presidential candidates in one broad stroke on Saturday night in an unexpected decision that once again threw into disarray the contest to shape the future of after the ouster of .
The High Election Commission struck down 10 candidates in all, including the three who have generated the most passion in this polarized nation: , the leading strategist of the ; Hazem Salah Abu Ismail, an ultraconservative Islamist; and , Mr. Mubarak¡¯s former vice president and intelligence chief.
A little more than a month before the vote begins, the ruling raised new doubts about the credibility of the election, which is supposed to inaugurate a new democracy after decades of authoritarian rule. It capped a year of opaque decisions behind closed doors, shifting ground rules and timetables, conspiracy theories about who holds true power, turbulence in the streets and growing political polarization during the military-led transition after the ouster of Hosni Mubarak.
And it comes at a time when the stakes of the presidential race have risen higher than ever: the Islamist majority in Parliament has clashed with the liberal minority over the writing of a constitution and with the military over the control of the government. Some warned it could set off new street protests.
At the same time, the commission, composed of five senior judges appointed by Mr. Mubarak, appeared to prove its independence, shutting down the candidate most linked to the Mubarak government and defying an angry mob of Islamists outside its door. It disqualified each of the candidates on narrow, technical grounds.
Mr. Abu Ismail¡¯s disqualification had been expected; a passport and voter registration had emerged proving that his mother had been an American citizen, which disqualifies him from the presidency under current Egyptian law.
Mr. Shater was ruled ineligible because of a past criminal conviction, even though the charges were widely viewed as trumped up by the Mubarak government to punish him for his role as a leader of the Islamist opposition.
Election authorities said Mr. Suleiman had failed to meet the signature requirement to qualify for the ballot. Of the 30,000 notarized statements he submitted last weekend, most were said to lack adequate authentication or failed to meet geographic distribution requirements, they said.
Egyptians were stunned by the breadth of the decision. On the pan-Arab news network Al Jazeera, the anchor appeared unable to contain a grin, shaking his head in disbelief as a correspondent in Cairo reported the news.
¡°My head spins,¡± said Michael W. Hanna, an Egyptian researcher at the Century Foundation in New York. ¡°It is so sweeping. It is increasingly puzzling what is going on and who is calling the shots.¡±
The campaigns have only two days to appeal to the commission and no recourse to any higher court. By Saturday night, conspiracy theories were already beginning to emerge about possible agendas behind the decisions.
The race has shaped up as a battle between Islamists and former officials of the Mubarak government. If the decision stands, it will effectively leave out the most polarizing candidates on both sides of the field.
Mr. Abu Ismail was the most hard-line Islamist, and Mr. Shater was the most powerful figure in the more moderate Muslim Brotherhood. On the other side, Mr. Suleiman was the closest to Mr. Mubarak and appeared most likely to try to restore something like the old order.
With those figures gone, the battle lines remain the same but the fight looks less ferocious. Among the remaining Islamists are Mohamed el-Mursi, a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood¡¯s political party and its backup nominee, and Abdel Moneim Aboul Fotouh, a more liberal former leader of the Brotherhood who was expelled last year for bucking the political decisions of its executive committee.
Among the former government officials, the remaining front-runner is Amr Moussa, a popular former diplomat who was sidelined within the government as a potential rival to Mr. Mubarak.
By Saturday night, some supporters of Mr. Abu Ismail were suggesting that they would take to the streets in protest. His backers have grown increasingly angry as they have denied mounting evidence of his mother¡¯s American citizenship, insisting that American documentation should not count in Egyptian courts. Before the decision was announced late Saturday, a mob of his supporters demonstrating outside the election commission on Friday night grew so rowdy that the commissioners were afraid for their safety. They ended their work early Friday and called for a heavy military guard when they resumed work on Saturday.
After the decision, Nizar Ghorab, a lawyer for Mr. Abu Ismail, told Reuters that he expected ¡°a major crisis to happen in the next few hours.¡±
