CAIRO ¡ª ¡¯s rival Islamist groups flexed their political muscle on Friday, drawing thousands of supporters from across the country to Tahrir Square to protest the presidential campaign of the longtime spy chief under the government of President Hosni Mubarak.
Islamists and secularists alike have viewed the unexpected entry into the presidential race of the candidate, , as a potentially existential threat to the country¡¯s year-old revolution and fitful move toward democracy.
Protesters marched to the square from neighborhoods across the capital and rode in from the countryside in a fleet of buses provided by the Freedom and Justice Party, the political arm of the . The crowd also drew heavily from the ultra-conservative Salafi religious movement as well as those who could be called Islamist political independents ¡ª people who support the Islamist trend but have not decided which party to support.
¡°Down with Omar Suleiman!¡± the crowd chanted. ¡°Down with the Zionist candidate! Down with military rule!¡±
Khaled el-Shafei, 38, an archaeologist from the rural Nile Delta, said his ¡°ideology lies with Khairat el-Shater,¡± a multimillionaire businessman who is the Freedom and Justice Party candidate, ¡°but I did not come here today for a party or an ideology. I would be happy with any elected president ¡ª an Islamist or a liberal ¡ª as long as they are not an army officer or remnant of the old regime.¡±
In an interview with the flagship state-run newspaper, Al-Ahram, published Friday, Mr. Suleiman vowed to continue his campaign, which has targeted Egyptians¡¯ anxieties about the country¡¯s rising crime and struggling economy, as well as growing unease over the surging power of Islamist movements, which were officially banned by the Mubarak regime.
His candidacy truck a sense of deep foreboding into many Egyptians who want to turn a new page on Mubarak-era abuses. Egypt¡¯s intelligence agency ¡ª the mukhabarat ¡ª is well known for its use of torture and domestic surveillance, election tampering and a deep hostility toward Islamists who have emerged as a major political force since the uprising in Tahrir Square.
Adding insult to injury, many feel, was an interview Mr. Suleiman gave during the 2011 uprising that drove Mr. Mubarak from power in which he said that Egyptians were not ready for democracy.
¡°When we heard he was running, we all thought we had gone crazy,¡± said Eman Mohamed, 37, a chemist with an international pharmaceutical company. ¡°He said we were not ready for democracy, he protected Mubarak, and now he wants to be president? It is impossible for anyone to accept that.¡±
Speaking at a crowded street rally in the working-class neighborhood of Shubra el-Kheima on Thursday night, Mr. Shater warned supporters of the potential dangers of a Suleiman presidency.
¡°Under the old system, it was the regime that decided who would live and who would die,¡± he declared from the stage, set up on a dusty roadside outside a glassware factory. ¡°This is what will happen again when a man like Omar Suleiman nominates himself for the presidency.¡±
Friday¡¯s rally was the largest to fill Tahrir Square in months, and the first since last fall to draw an overwhelmingly Islamist crowd. Banners hanging across the square condemned Mr. Suleiman for his warm ties with Israel, some showing a Star of David stamped across his face. Others bore a series of photographs of him shaking hands with smiling Israeli leaders.
Another banner blended his face with that of Mr. Mubarak, declaring, ¡°Hand in hand, we will defend our revolution anew, and continue until we are done with them both.¡±
¡°There is no one in Egypt, not Muslims and not Christians, who likes any of these men,¡± said Ramadan el-Sawy, 45, a supporter of the Salafi presidential candidate, Hazem Salah Abu Ismail. ¡°We want decent, respectable candidates. The people want someone who understands Islam. They want an Islamist.¡±
On Thursday, the fight against Mr. Suleiman¡¯s candidacy moved to Parliament, where members of Islamist parties hold roughly two-thirds of the seats and which passed a law barring high-ranking figures from the Mubarak government from running for office.
The ruling military council must approve the law for it to take effect, and it is likely to face a constitutional court challenge. If allowed to stand, the law would disqualify both Mr. Suleiman and Ahmed Shafik, the former prime minister appointed by Mr. Mubarak, as part of a cabinet reshuffle in the last days of his rule.
In the interview with Al Ahram, Mr. Suleiman accused the Muslim Brotherhood of plotting to wreak havoc on Egypt by transforming it into an Islamic state ¡°like Afghanistan or Pakistan.¡±
¡°The Brotherhood has hijacked the revolution from the young people, and have an intense hatred and desire for revenge and to burn down the country,¡± he said. ¡°I never imagined at all the state of severe worry that the people are going through, or the sense of inner turmoil and despair.¡±
