WASHINGTON ¡ª on Friday heads to Latin America for the third time for a summit meeting whose very location ¡ª ¡ª reflects the broader economic and security gains in the hemisphere.
Mr. Obama will spend the weekend in Colombia¡¯s coastal city of Cartagena at the for discussions with other leaders on trade, energy and that constant, drug trafficking. In contrast with the previous gathering three years ago, when the global economic crisis forced the leaders to focus simply on weathering the downturn, the changed agenda and mood for this gathering is summed up by its name ¡ª ¡°Connecting the Americas: Partners for Prosperity.¡±
The president will be navigating several controversial areas. Some leaders want to legalize currently illicit drugs; the United States is routinely pressed to end its half-century-old embargo against ; and American unions continue to criticize Colombia¡¯s labor-rights record. But none of those issues is seen as likely to overshadow the meeting.
¡°The best of the summit, what it provides, is an opportunity for the heads of state from all the countries in the hemisphere, almost all of them, to come together and have a moment ¡ª a forced moment ¡ª to talk,¡± said Shannon K. O¡¯Neil, a Latin American studies fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. And on energy, commerce and infrastructure projects, she added, ¡°You could see movement forward¡± that will not necessarily be reflected in the press releases.
For the most part, the tension over Cuba seems mostly to be behind Mr. Obama ¡ª a not insignificant consideration in a presidential election year in which Florida, the bastion of anti-Castro sentiment, could be a critical swing state. Ecuador¡¯s president, , announced earlier this month that he would boycott the meeting in Colombia because Cuba, as usual, was not invited, but he failed to persuade other leftist leaders in the region to do the same. And , who succeeded his brother Fidel as Cuba¡¯s leader, said he did not want to attend anyway, sparing Mr. Obama the prospect of any photo opportunities with a Castro.
¡°We look forward to the day when a democratic Cuba rejoins the inter-American system,¡± said Dan Restrepo, the top White House adviser for Latin American policy. ¡°Unfortunately,¡± he added, ¡°Cuban authorities haven¡¯t decided to go down that path. Instead you see, even with in Cuba a couple weeks ago, the Cubans insisted publicly that theirs will remain a one-party state.¡±
Julia E. Sweig, director of Latin American studies at the Council on Foreign Relations, all but dismissed the potential for spats over the United States¡¯ policies. ¡°It¡¯s a perennial issue that any White House will continue to have to contend with¡± until Communist Cuba democratizes, she said.
Drugs may be more of a problem. Most leaders in the region believe the United States-led war on drugs has failed. It has neither controlled supply, by reducing the ranks of drug lords and smugglers, nor cut demand, by changing consumer habits at home.
Demand has also risen sharply in Brazil. The host of the summit meeting, President of Colombia, has put on the table the general topic of an alternative policy.
The president of Guatemala, Otto P¨¦rez Molina, has led the call for decriminalization of narcotics, a proposal that is certain to be discussed.
¡°U.S. policy on this is very clear,¡± Mr. Restrepo said. ¡°The president doesn¡¯t support decriminalization. He does think this is a legitimate debate and it¡¯s a debate that we welcome having because it helps demystify this as an option.¡±
Mr. Obama will emphasize the financing increases that the administration has won for drug treatment and prevention in the United States, responding to the sense that the country needs to do more to curtail demand. Brazil¡¯s president, Dilma Rousseff, at the White House on Monday for a meeting with Mr. Obama, said, ¡°As I have consistently mentioned, I believe that when it comes to drug trafficking, we have to take a hard stance in fighting drug trafficking while addressing those that have fallen prey.¡±
The president¡¯s focus will be on free trade throughout the Western Hemisphere, aides said, in keeping with his pledge to double American exports.
According to the administration, more than 40 percent of the nation¡¯s exports are to the Americas, including Canada, and the traffic is growing faster than trade elsewhere.
Trade pacts with Colombia and Panama took effect late last year, but the Colombia agreement remains controversial with Mr. Obama¡¯s union allies.
The president of the , Richard L. Trumka, wrote to Mr. Obama last week warning him not to certify that Colombia has complied with a side agreement requiring that nation to do more to stop the decades-long killings of labor leaders there.
On his way to Colombia, Mr. Obama will stop in Tampa, Fla., whose port handles a significant amount of trade with southern neighbors.
He will then go to Cartagena for dinner with other leaders before two days of talks.
Colombia is an appropriate venue, administration officials said, given that it has overcome years of drug-related chaos and civil war to become what Benjamin J. Rhodes, deputy national security adviser, called ¡°a tremendous success story in the Americas.¡±
¡°The attention of the United States is often focused on trouble spots,¡± like Afghanistan, Mr. Rhodes said. But, he added, ¡°There is a unique quality to the relationship with the Americas,¡± given that so many Americans trace their heritage there.
