BAMAKO, Mali ¡ª In life, he delighted in fomenting insurgencies in the African nations to the south. And in death, Col. is doing it all over again.
Hundreds of Tuareg rebels, heavily armed courtesy of Colonel Qaddafi¡¯s extensive arsenal, have stormed towns in Mali¡¯s northern desert in recent weeks, in one of the most significant regional shock waves to emanate directly from the colonel¡¯s fall.
After fighting for Colonel Qaddafi as he struggled to stay in power, the Tuaregs helped themselves to a considerable quantity of sophisticated weaponry before returning to Mali. When they got here, they reinvigorated a longstanding rebellion and blossomed into a major challenge for this impoverished desert nation, an important American ally against the regional Al Qaeda franchise.
The Tuaregs hoisted their rebel flag in the sandy northern towns, shelled military installations, announced the ¡°liberation¡± of the area and shouted ¡°Allahu akbar,¡± or ¡°God is great,¡± according to local officials. Their sudden strength has deeply surprised a Malian Army accustomed to fighting wispy turbaned fighters wielding only Kalashnikov rifles.
Months after the death of Colonel Qaddafi, his weapons have armed a rebel movement in Africa. In life he backed African insurgencies in Chad, Angola, Guinea-Bissau, Eritrea, Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe.
And for this sparsely populated land, the recent fighting seems a step beyond the army¡¯s desert skirmishes with the Tuaregs in the 1960s, the early 1990s and again in 2006. This time, the rebels are not being quickly stamped out or fleeing to the rocky mountains of this vast, inhospitable region. To the contrary, officials now say they are facing perhaps the most serious threat ever from the Tuaregs.
Emboldened by their new weaponry, they have formed a made-to-order liberation movement, the M.N.L.A., or Mouvement National Pour la Lib¨¦ration de l¡¯Azawad ¡ª Azawad being the name they give to northern Mali.
¡°Our goal is to liberate our lands from Malian occupation,¡± said Moussa Ag Acharatoumane, one of the rebel spokesmen in exile in France.
The rebels ¡ª perhaps as many as 1,000, commanded by a former colonel in ¡¯s army ¡ª brought with them enough of an arsenal to create a kind of standoff with the Malian Army.
¡°Heavy weapons,¡± said Mali¡¯s foreign minister, Soumeylou Boub¨¨ye Ma?ga, referring to the new arms. ¡°Antitank weapons. Antiaircraft weapons.¡±
Malian military officials agree. ¡°Robust, powerful machine guns,¡± said Lt. Col. Diarran Kone of the Defense Ministry. ¡°Mortars,¡± he added, describing the weaponry as ¡°significant enough to allow them to achieve their objectives.¡±
About a half-dozen towns in the north have been attacked, including Niafounk¨¦. Both government and rebel forces have suffered casualties, and nearly 10,000 civilians have fled the fighting, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The situation appears to have worsened for the Mali government over the past few days. The rebels have retaken the town of M¨¦naka, a military spokesman, Idrissa Traor¨¦, acknowledged Friday, adding that a number of soldiers and civilians ¡ª he refused to say how many ¡ª had been killed by the rebels in the town of Aguelhok. In Bamako, the capital, families of soldiers have demonstrated against what they say is the government¡¯s poor handling of the rebel offensive, blocking roads and burning tires. The defense minister has been replaced, and reprisals have been reported against Tuareg citizens living in the south.
Officials in Bamako make no secret of their shock at what one Western diplomat called the ¡°robustness¡± of the rebel incursion.
¡°All of a sudden we found ourselves face to face with a thousand men, heavily armed,¡± said Mr. Ma?ga, the foreign minister. ¡°The stability of the entire region could be under threat.¡±
The Malians, who viewed Colonel Qaddafi as a generous benefactor ¡ª he helped build an administrative complex here, among other things ¡ª now find themselves gnashing their teeth over this less beneficent aspect of his legacy. Still, officials here insist that the situation in the north is under control, while acknowledging that the threat is not over.
Analysts who study the region agree that the latest Tuareg resurgence is something new, and that Colonel Qaddafi is largely responsible, posthumously.
