CAIRO ¡ª The six-month-old government of cracked down with tear gas and batons Monday on thousands of protesters who filled a central artery of the capital in defiance of a new ban on demonstrations there.
The confrontation, at the site of the protests that ousted former President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali and kicked off the Arab Spring last year, was another manifestation of a role reversal now playing out across North Africa in the aftermath of the revolts in neighboring Egypt and Libya as well. In each, former exiles and political prisoners who spent careers under police state rule find themselves struggling to impose a new order on the bedlam left after the old regime¡¯s collapse.
¡°There is a difference between a revolution and chaos,¡± said Said Ferjani, a torture victim and former exile who is now a spokesman for the moderate Islamist party that leads Tunisia¡¯s constituent assembly.
In both Egypt and Tunisia, the Islamist parties leading the new legislatures ¡ª outlawed as radicals under their former governments ¡ª take a conservative, business-friendly approach to matters of law and order that is at odds with more left-leaning forces in the revolts.
In Tunisia, that tension has become particularly focused on Avenue Bourguiba in Tunis ¡ª a central thoroughfare that is the symbolic core of the country¡¯s revolution, like Tahrir Square is in Cairo. Labor groups, liberals and conservative Islamists have all used the avenue as a staging ground for demonstrations to voice their demands. Local merchants and businesses, meanwhile, complain that the protests have scared off tourists, ruining any hope of economic revival.
The situation came to a head on March 28, when two rival groups of liberal artists and ultraconservative Islamists both staged marches there. Clashes ensued, with the ultraconservatives attacking the artists.
In response, the government announced a ban on protests along the avenue, directing demonstrators to march elsewhere. And on Saturday, the police first used tear gas and batons to enforce the new ban when a few hundred members of a group billing itself as a union of the unemployed tried to march from the nearby headquarters of the national labor union.
Monday¡¯s demonstration became, in effect, a protest demanding the right to protest. And in a flashback to the days of protests that brought down Mr. Ben Ali, the police once again filled the air with tear gas and tried to chase down demonstrators.
Amna Guellali, a researcher for Human Rights Watch, said the police had beaten some members of the constituent assembly from the liberal opposition who had participated in the march.
She said the clashes appeared to mark a new level of animosity between the government and the secular left. ¡°People went down to the Avenue Bourguiba with the spirit of a showdown with the government,¡± she said. ¡°There was a feeling of ¡®We are going to defy this ban just as we did during Ben Ali¡¯s rule.¡¯?¡±
