A year and a half after cholera first struck , a tiny portion of the population on Thursday began getting vaccinated against the waterborne disease that has infected more than 530,000 Haitians and killed more than 7,040.
Organizers of the vaccination campaign, who have been pushing to do this since the epidemic began, cleared their final political hurdle this week when a national bioethics committee approved their plan to use all available doses of the cheapest cholera vaccine to immunize about 1 percent of the population.
On Thursday, tens of thousands of slum dwellers in Port-au-Prince took their first of two doses of the oral vaccine, Shanchol; tens of thousands of rural residents of a rice-growing community near St. Marc will begin this weekend. The second dose will be administered in two weeks.
The organizers ¡ª Partners in Health and Gheskio, which also collaborate on H.I.V. and AIDS care ¡ª had hoped to beat the spring rains that spread the cholera germ. But they ran into an unanticipated roadblock and the rains have already started to drench the country, causing flooding and a spike in cases.
The roadblock surfaced in March when a Haitian radio station raised questions about the vaccination campaign, which had been approved by the Haitian health minister last year.
The radio station asked if the campaign could be seen as a medical experiment using poor Haitians as guinea pigs, which prompted the bioethics committee to take up the issue.
Announcing this week that the ¡°pilot project¡± would move forward, Dr. Gabriel Timoth¨¦e, director general of the Haitian Health Ministry, said, ¡°This is not a study, it is not a vaccine trial, it is not an experiment.¡±
The use of cholera vaccine in Haiti has been mired in controversy since the epidemic began in mid-October of 2010.
World health authorities initially opposed vaccination, citing cost, logistical challenges and limited vaccine supplies.
Shanchol was still under review by the World Health Organization then, ¡°with significant concerns in that review about safety and manufacturing practices,¡± said Jon Kim Andrus, deputy director of the Pan American Health Organization.
But proponents argued that the vaccine could save lives, reduce the caseload and buy time until long-range solutions like water and sanitation systems could be put in place.
They called for expediting approval for Shanchol, for increasing vaccine production by offering manufacturers purchase commitments and for using available doses to immunize especially vulnerable people.
World health authorities eventually endorsed a trial campaign, but the Haitian government did not want to stir political trouble by choosing who would get the vaccine.
Time passed; a new government took power; Shanchol, which is manufactured in India, was approved. And the small vaccination campaign has begun, with organizers hoping that it will succeed and lead to a broader use of the vaccine in Haiti.
¡°It¡¯s the ethical and equitable thing to do,¡± said Dr. Paul Farmer, a co-founder of Partners in Health. ¡°If cholera had exploded in the United States like it did in Haiti, everybody would have gotten the vaccine by now.¡±
