BEIRUT, Lebanon ¡ª The Syrian peace plan that was brokered under auspices appeared to be on life support on Tuesday, with disregarding the initial step of returning its security forces to their barracks and senior diplomats around the world preparing for an ever more unlikely cease-fire set for Thursday.
The plan¡¯s high-profile architect, Kofi Annan, the special representative of both the United Nations and the Arab League, insisted that the agreement remained viable, saying at a news conference in , ¡°I believe it¡¯s a bit too early to say that the plan has failed.¡±
Yet he sounded far more pessimistic in a lengthy letter to the United Nations Security Council, blaming the Syrian government for the lack of progress.
Should the cease-fire fail to materialize on Thursday, it will raise uncomfortable questions about what options are left for the international community to stop a 13-month-old conflict that has claimed at least 9,000 lives, by the United Nations¡¯ count.
There has been little appetite for outside military intervention in Syria, a strategic country riven by sectarian divisions that echo beyond its borders. Yet repeated calls for a halt in the violence have failed. Russia, in the global spotlight as Syria¡¯s patron, faces pressure over its demand that peace should come on Syrian terms.
The 15-member Security Council backed Mr. Annan¡¯s call for the looming cease-fire to be respected by both sides, with a particular onus on Damascus, Susan E. Rice, the American envoy and this month¡¯s Council president, told reporters at the United Nations.
In his letter, Mr. Annan said it had become clear over the past five days that the Syrian government had not signaled to its military to withdraw from major cities and towns, as the plan stipulated.
Although the Syrian government cited a few places where its troops had withdrawn, his letter said, ¡°credible reports indicate that during that same period, the Syrian armed forces have conducted rolling military operations in population centers, characterized by troop movements into towns supported by artillery fire.¡±
Mr. Annan wrote that the Syrian government¡¯s surprise new conditions put forward since Sunday, including guarantees of compliance from the opposition and its regional allies, risked undermining the peace plan.
Mr. Annan¡¯s letter, as well as statements from senior officials in Washington, Paris and London, all corroborated what Syrian activists were saying inside the country about the lack of any military shift on the ground.
In embattled Damascus suburbs like Douma, streets were still filled with soldiers and tanks surrounding the town, while a resident of Aleppo reached by telephone said a full-scale army assault on a chain of villages north of the city was continuing unabated.
Waleed al-Fares, an activist in the Khaldiya neighborhood of Homs, said in a telephone call via Skype: ¡°I don¡¯t know if you hear the explosions and the shelling in the background now while I talk to you. Do you hear? The tanks are still in their place, and we took pictures that show the army in the streets. Nothing has changed, and the shelling is continuous. There are still tanks and snipers.¡±
Activist organizations counted dozens of people killed, while noting that forces in opposition to President Bashar al-Assad were still at work. The British-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said 19 soldiers had been killed in attacks, while state-run media said 33 members of the armed forces were buried.
Activists said that the main umbrella organizations of the opposition, both the Syrian National Council and the Free Syrian Army, had committed to the cease-fire but that it was unclear if they held sway over the loose coalition of armed men arrayed against the government.
The Syrian National Council called the battery of new conditions demanded by Damascus ¡°unacceptable and unrealistic.¡± Bassma Kodmani, a member of the executive committee, told reporters in Geneva that the Assad government ¡°intends to intensify rather than beginning to comply with the cease-fire.¡±
Even Moscow hinted at some exasperation with Damascus. ¡°Their steps could be more active and more decisive,¡± said Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, at a joint news conference in Moscow with his Syrian colleague, Walid al-Moallem.
