SEOUL, South Korea ¡ª neared completion of the hurried transition to its young new leader, , on Thursday, as a confrontation with the United States loomed over the North¡¯s intent to launch a long-range rocket.
The governing Workers¡¯ Party, during the country¡¯s first major political gathering in a year and a half, declared Mr. Kim ¡°supreme leader¡± on Wednesday and awarded him the title of first secretary. On Thursday, North Korea also said that Mr. Kim had been elevated to chairman of the party¡¯s central military commission and granted membership in the Politburo and its presidium. The inevitable elevation of Mr. Kim later this week to the top defense commission post will cap his rise to the pinnacle of party, military and state leadership.
The speed of his elevation, analysts in the region said, reflected the insecurity of the young leader¡¯s status as much as it did the secretive leadership¡¯s need to have a solid power center in place immediately.
The country¡¯s Unha, or Galaxy, rocket is expected to blast off within days. The North says the rocket¡¯s purpose is peaceful ¡ª to put a satellite in orbit ¡ª but the United States and other countries see the event as a test of long-range missile technology.
North Korea is trying to use the political celebrations to project the image of what its propaganda commonly refers to as a ¡°strong and prosperous nation¡± and inspire national pride in its hunger-stricken people.
The national flag and the red hammer-and-sickle flag of the Workers¡¯ Party fluttered across Pyongyang, The Associated Press said, as party delegates toured historic sites. Among them was the place where the new supreme leader¡¯s grandfather, Kim Il-sung, the revered national founder, was born. His centenary will be celebrated on Sunday, and workers scrambled to spruce up the city and plant roadside flowers.
The Workers¡¯ Party conference gives the young leader ¡ª or the senior power elite surrounding him ¡ª an opportunity to shuffle party and military leadership, gradually retiring stalwarts from the days when his father, Kim Jong-il, was leader and elevating younger loyalists.
Such a generational change has been unfolding since Mr. Kim, who is believed to be in his late 20s, was officially designated as his father¡¯s successor in the last party meeting, in September 2010. More signs of the shift came at the party conference on Wednesday, when a group of officials were promoted. Mr. Kim¡¯s aunt Kim Kyong-hee became a party secretary, and her husband, Jang Song-taek, became a Politburo member. The couple were considered to be among Mr. Kim¡¯s mentors.
Vice Marshal Kim Jong-gak, a key military political officer widely believed to be Mr. Kim¡¯s promoter among the military elite, was named a Politburo member, a day after the North Korean news media revealed that he had been made defense minister.
The most eye-catching rise, however, was that of Choe Ryong-hae, a party secretary who became a member of the presidium of the Politburo, said Cheong Seong-chang, a North Korea analyst at the Sejong Institute in Seoul. Mr. Choe, who, at 62, is relatively young among the top North Korean leaders, was also made vice chairman of the party¡¯s central military commission.
His rise also showed that the dynastic transfer of power was not just for the Kim family but was often for the rest of the elite as well ¡ª a factor that analysts often cite to help explain the cohesion of the Kim rule. Mr. Choe¡¯s father fought alongside Mr. Kim¡¯s grandfather when he led Korean guerrillas during Japanese colonial rule, from 1910 to 1945. The families of many of those guerrillas remained key members of the ruling class.
However, Kim Jong-il, who died in December 2011, never achieved the revered status of his father. On Wednesday, the party decided to leave the previous top post ¡ª general secretary ¡ª vacant, designating Kim Jong-il ¡°eternal general secretary.¡± Similarly, when Kim Il-sung died in 1994, he was upheld as ¡°eternal president.¡±
¡°Kim Jong-un wanted to show respect to his father, and so created a new top job for him,¡± said Koh Yu-hwan, a North Korea specialist at Dongguk University in Seoul.
Mr. Cheong, the Sejong Institute analyst, said that one of the most important qualifications for Mr. Kim as successor was to demonstrate loyalty to his father and grandfather. The move illustrated the long shadows of his forefathers under which the young leader must operate.
Choi Myeong-hae, a North Korea analyst at the Samsung Economic Research Institute in Seoul, said: ¡°Kim Jong-un is an avatar of his father. This may indicate that it¡¯s still his father¡¯s people who make key policy decisions in Pyongyang and that his control of power is incomplete and his position less than secure.¡±
Mr. Choi said those engineering Mr. Kim¡¯s rise to power were those handpicked by his father, rather than his own selections, indicating that it would take longer for him to establish his own authority.
