BEIJING ¡ª The Chinese government, citing security concerns, has signaled that it may scale back the role that foreign companies play in the country¡¯s fast-growing video surveillance industry.
Foreign firms currently hold 80 percent of China¡¯s multibillion-dollar surveillance market, according to Frost & Sullivan, a financial research company. that the market is expanding by 20 percent a year and could be worth more than $11 billion by 2015, with much of that growth fueled by government purchases.
But by the state-run China Daily, a Ministry of Public Security official said that domestic companies were better suited to produce the equipment and software that are part of the Safe Cities program, a six-year-old surveillance network that uses Internet-connected cameras to combat street crime and to keep tabs on political dissidents.
¡°China's security cameras play an important role in countering crimes and maintaining social stability,¡± Chen Chaowu, deputy director of a research institute affiliated with the Ministry of Public Security, told China Daily. ¡°In some important areas and industries, we should avoid the risks to national security that might come from using overseas standards and products.¡±
He noted that the government planned to integrate all surveillance cameras into a unified system in the coming years.
Mr. Chen¡¯s comments followed last month detailing the recent acquisition of a Chinese surveillance camera manufacturer by Bain Capital, the private equity firm founded by Mitt Romney. The Bain-owned company, , sells ¡°antiriot¡± cameras to the government and has helped set up scores of surveillance systems, including an emergency command center in Tibet that it advertises for use in ¡°both peacetime and wartime.¡±
It is not clear, however, whether Mr. Chen¡¯s statements carry much weight. Last week, Cantronic, a companybased in Vancouver, British Columbia, announced that it had signed a deal to provide software for a $1.2 billion surveillance project in Chongqing, a city in southwest China. That project involves 500,000 cameras.
