BEIJING ¡ª What began as a scandal involving the mysterious death of , the British businessman whose body was found in November in a Chongqing hotel room, appears to be evolving into a broader investigation into the wealth of a politically powerful Chinese couple, and his wife, Gu Kailai, and their financial interests.
The authorities seem particularly focused on Ms. Gu, 53, a hard-driving lawyer and the daughter of a revolutionary hero who critics say has spent more than two decades turning her husband¡¯s government posts into lucrative business opportunities.
Analysts say that by moving decisively to bury Ms. Gu and her husband, party leaders are trying to send a message to allies of Mr. Bo who are still putting up resistance. ¡°This is why the dog who has fallen into the water is still being beaten,¡± said Steven Tsang, director of Policy Institute at the University of Nottingham in England.
Official news media reports this week accused Mr. Bo of various disciplinary violations, not explicitly corruption. However, several people briefed on the investigation into the couple say that central authorities have included corruption among the accusations circulated to high-level officials in recent weeks.
People¡¯s Daily, the party¡¯s official newspaper, appeared to lay out a list of potential charges on Wednesday that could be brought against Ms. Gu and her husband, who is also the offspring of a revolutionary ¡°immortal¡± and, like his wife, has long enjoyed the access to power that comes with such a pedigree.
The article said that corrupt party officials have been secretly using children, wives, friends and even mistresses to transfer and conceal ill-gotten wealth overseas. ¡°Some even go through a variety of channels to clandestinely gain a foreign identity or dual nationality,¡± it said.
A campaign to expose the family¡¯s web of business dealings carries certain risks, given that many members of China¡¯s political elite profit from their connections and often stow their assets outside the country.
Even if the article did not name names, astute readers of China¡¯s opaque political ecosystem said it was probably aimed at Mr. Bo, until recently Chongqing¡¯s party boss, and Ms. Gu, who has spent considerable time abroad and who may hold foreign residency. Under party rules, spouses of senior officials are barred from holding foreign passports or residency permits.
The couple¡¯s son, Bo Guagua, 24, could also figure into the mix. A graduate student at Harvard University, Mr. Bo has spent half his life outside China and, until his father¡¯s downfall last month, had been trying to start an Internet business in China. Friends of his say he is shutting down that venture, a social media site.
Some critics have questioned how the elder Mr. Bo, with his modest government salary, could afford tuition at a string of expensive private schools in both England and the United States; during a news conference days before he was relieved of his job, Mr. Bo insisted that his son¡¯s schooling was paid for through scholarships. He also said his wife had not worked for a decade.
Then there are members of the extended Bo clan.
On Thursday it was learned that Mr. Bo¡¯s older brother, Bo Xiyong, has for nine years served under an assumed name as executive director and deputy general manager of China Everbright Holdings, a state-owned company that controls one of China¡¯s major banks and an array of other businesses.
Under the name Li Xueming, Bo Xiyong? receives a $1.7 million annual salary and holds stock options worth nearly $25 million, according to a profile maintained by Bloomberg Businessweek.
Mr. Bo¡¯s ties to Everbright, first reported Thursday by the Hong Kong newspaper Apple Daily, were described by a person familiar with the company who refused to be named because the issue was too delicate.
Two women described by Apple Daily as sisters of Ms. Gu also show up in Hong Kong corporate records. A check of the records on Thursday showed that one of them, Gu Wangjiang, has been a director of eight privately held companies in Hong Kong and that another, Gu Wangning, has been a director of one of them.
Gu Wangjiang, Gu Wangning and Bo Xiyong could not be reached for comment.
Despite their best efforts to obscure such arrangements, senior Communist Party officials often use their connections to help relatives secure well-paid jobs at state-owned companies.
When it comes to harnessing family ties, Mr. Bo¡¯s wife is thought to have done particularly well, according to those who have followed her career.
