BEIJING ¡ª The scandal that climaxed here on Tuesday when Communist Party leaders suspended the Politburo member and accused his wife of murder seems poised to destroy a charismatic party leader who challenged President Hu Jintao and Prime Minister Wen Jiabao¡¯s vision for .
But for the Chinese leaders who purged Mr. Bo, there are threats as well.
In the view of some analysts and party insiders, that same scandal has raised the notion of high-level misconduct among China¡¯s elite to a level that some say could have far-reaching and unpleasant implications for stability. It could cast a long shadow over one of the party¡¯s linchpins: the notion that a handful of all-powerful officials and retired elders are better qualified to pick their successors than are ordinary citizens.
¡°I think that this could have a deep and delegitimizing impact on China, not now, but in the long run,¡± Joseph Fewsmith, a Boston University scholar of elite Chinese politics, said of the Bo family scandals.
¡°This has got to be shocking to the people of China,¡± he said. ¡°I think the party has lost a lot of credibility.¡±
How revelations of murder and potential cover-up in the party¡¯s highest echelons will resonate is unclear. But it seems plain that Mr. Bo¡¯s rivals within the elite are trying to make the most of his travails.
To date, the party¡¯s vague wording indicates that Mr. Bo is at least accused of obstructing justice in the investigation of his wife, Gu Kailai, and that Ms. Gu faces homicide charges. Ms. Gu stands accused of ordering the murder of a British businessman and onetime family friend, Neil Heywood, after a business dispute that belies Mr. Bo¡¯s assurance last month that she was but a housewife and helpmate.
But an emerging drip of corruption-related disclosures this week, largely in a Chinese news media that normally exists in a state-dictated chokehold, points to an orchestrated campaign to paint Mr. Bo and his relatives as mired in graft and greed.
The effect could be to neuter a politician whose populist policies of wealth redistribution and corruption-fighting had endeared him to citizens of Chongqing, where he was the Communist Party secretary until last month, and were gaining traction elsewhere in the nation.
¡°It was very brutal, very tough,¡± said Jing Huang, a scholar of Chinese politics who heads the Center on Asia and Globalization at the National University of Singapore. ¡°This sends a message to anyone who is behind Bo to back off. They are making Bo the poster child of corruption and crime.¡±
Beyond Mr. Bo¡¯s destruction, however, lies a larger question of how China¡¯s leaders address a growing perception that this is a society rotting from the top, an impression that the spectacular Bo scandal can only reinforce.
The state-controlled capitalism pushed by Chinese leaders has created an economic colossus, but at the cost of a steadily widening gap in both wealth and privilege between the rich and poor. Mr. Bo, though generally a supporter of the Chinese economic model, sought to build a political base made of ardent socialists by emphasizing the need to ensure more social welfare for the middle and lower classes.
Citizens are both boiling over about and wearily resigned to corruption and impunity among their elites, a ubiquitous topic on the microblogs that increasingly are the national water cooler.
High-level corruption within China is not a rarity. In the last 17 years, the party bosses of Beijing and Shanghai have been removed and later imprisoned for graft. Internal cables from the United States Embassy in Beijing, released last year by the WikiLeaks project, detailed allegations of favoritism at the government¡¯s highest levels.
In the Politburo¡¯s all-powerful Standing Committee, for example, they suggest that Mr. Bo¡¯s foremost patron Zhou Yongkang is tied to China¡¯s , that Jia Qinglin, the nation¡¯s fourth-ranked leader, is linked to Beijing real estate and the wife of the prime minister, Mr. Wen, is a major figure in gem trading.
Mr. Bo¡¯s downfall has far broader resonance, not only because it involves a leading national figure and murder ¡ª and murder of a foreigner, no less ¡ª but because such scandals can no longer be confined, even in China¡¯s walled-off cyberworld.
The Communist Party is doing all it can to cast the case in the opposite light: that the party should be congratulated for confronting accusations of murder against the spouse of a Politburo member and meting out justice with an even hand.
Chinese officials said this week that they had closed 42 Web sites and censored 210,000 online comments since mid-March in a campaign to suppress ¡°Internet-based rumors,¡± a principal target of an online crackdown related to the Bo family scandal. But in a wired world, even ordinary Chinese increasingly know better.
Some experts, like Mr. Fewsmith of Boston University, compare the Bo scandal to the case of Lin Biao, a hero of the Communist revolution whom Mao Zedong once tapped as his successor, but who died in a suspicious plane crash after a falling-out. Mr. Lin¡¯s death, he said, was a tipping point for many Chinese who decided that Mao¡¯s aim was not to better people¡¯s lives, but to gain still more power.
The Bo affair presents China¡¯s leadership with a crucial and similar choice between burying serious political problems and settling them openly, said Cheng Li, a scholar of China¡¯s leadership at the Brookings Institution.
¡°It¡¯s not about ideological disputes. It¡¯s not about Bo¡¯s personality or his ego or his ambition. It¡¯s about the very legitimacy of the Chinese Communist Party,¡± Mr. Li said. ¡°People will ask, ¡®How can it be possible that a soon-to-be top leader of the country could be involved in a murder?¡¯? How the system could produce this kind of crisis is a wake-up call.¡±
