BEIJING ¡ª Chinese officials rapidly intensified a propaganda campaign to paper over a leadership split in the Communist Party on Thursday as the first hints began to emerge of the wealth and influence amassed by relatives of a deposed Politburo member, .
The burst of coverage was remarkable for its intensity and focused message, even for a propaganda apparatus that regularly sings the party¡¯s praises, analysts said, reflecting deep concern that Mr. Bo¡¯s removal and the murder investigation aimed at him and his wife would deepen a now evident split between the Communist left and the more moderate right wing.
The two-day blitz of articles and television segments included an unusual television national news segment in which a series of local leaders proclaimed their support for the party. Newspapers and Web sites recounted declarations of unanimous support for the party¡¯s Central Committee from a congress of local party officials in Chongqing, Mr. Bo¡¯s former domain.
The state news media also gave extensive coverage to anticorruption efforts in the Chinese military, including an exhortation by President to maintain purity in the military ranks.
¡°The way they¡¯re using the news media over the last 48 hours really projects a sense of deep insecurity,¡± said one analyst, said David Bandurski, at the Media Project at the University of Hong Kong.
¡°When you have to drum home the point of unity this hard,¡± he added, ¡°it conveys the opposite message.¡±
But another scholar of the leadership, Dorothy J. Solinger of the University of California at Irvine, suggested that party officials more likely are transmitting an order for underlings to fall in line and support the dismantling of Mr. Bo¡¯s political machine.
One driving factor in the leadership split is economic policy. Mr. Bo and his supporters favored a large government role in guiding the economy, while many senior leaders want further, accelerated relaxation of state controls.
Mr. Bo¡¯s own financial network has become a target in the propaganda campaign. An article on Wednesday in People¡¯s Daily, the Communist Party¡¯s official newspaper, that on its face discussed the party¡¯s fight against corruption, appeared to lay out a list of potential charges that could be brought against Mr. Bo. ¡°Some people¡± have secretly gained dual citizenship and foreign identities, the article said, transferred money and goods overseas, and used relatives, friends and mistresses to conceal their wealth.
On Thursday, a Hong Kong newspaper, Apple Daily, disclosed myriad details of Bo family dealings in line with those criticisms. His older brother, Bo Xiyong, has for nine years served under an assumed name as executive director and deputy general manager of China Everbright Holdings, a state-owned company that controls one of China¡¯s major banks and an array of other businesses.
Under the name Li Xueming, Bo Xiyong receives a $1.7 million annual salary and holds stock options worth nearly $25 million by also holding the position of vice chairman in one of the state company¡¯s series of Hong Kong-traded subsidiaries, China Everbright International, according to a profile maintained by Bloomberg Businessweek. Until May 31 he also was deputy chairman of Hong Kong Construction Limited, a Chinese property developer.
Senior Communist Party officials are known to frequently secure lucrative jobs in state-owned companies for family members and relatives, often through connections. Mr. Bo¡¯s ties to Everbright, first published by Apple Daily, were also described by a person familiar with the company who refused to be named because of the political sensitivity of the issue.
Two women the newspaper described as sisters of Bo Xilai¡¯s wife, Gu Kailai, also show up in Hong Kong corporate records. A check of the records on Thursday showed that Gu Wangjiang has been a director of eight privately held companies in Hong Kong and that Gu Wangning has also been a director of one of these companies, Hangang Worldwide Ltd. Neither Gu Wangjiang, Gu Wangning nor Bo Xiyong could be reached for comment.
Mr. Bo once aspired to join the Politburo¡¯s Standing Committee, the nine-member body that effectively runs China, when a once-in-a-decade turnover of the leadership takes place this year. The authorities had been almost obsessed with demonstrating that the nation¡¯s top leaders were in total agreement in advance of that handoff, to minimize rumors of infighting over the composition of the next generation of rulers.
But that facade broke in February, when a top aide who had fallen out with Mr. Bo fled to an American consulate and told diplomats that Mr. Bo¡¯s wife had a falling out with a British businessman and onetime family friend and was implicated in his murder. That man, , was found dead in November in Chongqing, the southwestern city-state where Mr. Bo was party secretary.
Attention to the case skyrocketed this week, as party leaders announced Tuesday that Mr. Bo had been suspended from the 25-member Politburo and that his wife would be investigated in connection with Mr. Heywood¡¯s death.
