SARAJEVO ¡ª When war raged here in the 1990s, it was easy to understand why this city felt so intense. Under siege, there was a nearly constant danger of death or injury; residents were often hungry and, in winter, cold; the reputations of international organizations and individual diplomats crumbled in fruitless negotiations with local leaders more concerned about their own power and money than about their people.
Watching it close up was so searing that returning to Western Europe was often unsettling ¡ª friends could not comprehend what we journalists and others had seen. As the BBC reporter Allan Little put it this month, ruminating on the 20th anniversary of the 1992-95 war in Bosnia: ¡°People asked about the war, but their eyes would glaze over when you answered. So you would seek out others who¡¯d been there.
¡°Walking in Hyde Park you would instinctively avoid the grassy areas in case there were land mines. You would scan the rooftops of Oxford Street for snipers. And you couldn¡¯t wait to go back.¡±
Mr. Little and scores of other journalists who covered the Bosnian war did return to Sarajevo last weekend, meeting old friends, recalling good times in the worst of times, reminiscing about absent colleagues, rejoicing in reunion.
While the joy and the memories were expected, something else ¡ª for me, at least ¡ª was not: a renewed sense of what the media can, and cannot, do.
As the Serbs encircled Sarajevo in the spring of 1992, one of their first actions was to take over and destroy the P.T.T. (post, telegraph and telephone ¡ª remember that quaint designation?). Certainly, the Serb forces did not want their actions chronicled, or reported in any unbiased way that they did not control.
Apparently, they forgot a key factor: the satellite telephone, or satphone. Peter Arnett of CNN had used one to great effect during the 1991 Gulf War, reporting from Baghdad as the United States and its allies waged war on Iraq.
They were then the size of suitcases ¡ª at one point in the war, when I worked for The Associated Press, our ingenious Bosnian bureau chief, Aida Cerkez, hired donkeys to take one up the mountains out of the city. But without satphones, much of Sarajevo¡¯s horror would have either gone unreported or been recounted weeks later, with little of the stunning urgency of footage of civilians being mowed down by snipers, or tower blocks crumbling in heavy shelling.
That urgency, it seemed to many of us, was scarcely reflected in the tortuous arrangements that the international community sought to devise to end the violence. Peacekeepers were sent to a region where there was no peace to keep. The United Nations treated a war as a humanitarian crisis ¡ª ¡°like a flood,¡± as Ms. Cerkez says now.
In the end, a combination of serious negotiation ¡ª the dispatch of Richard C. Holbrooke and his colleagues to Belgrade, Zagreb and Sarajevo starting in late spring 1995 ¡ª and real force ¡ª NATO airstrikes in August 1995, after the massacre at Srebrenica ¡ª brought the fighting to a messy close.
Looking today at Syria, we see another worthy envoy, Kofi Annan, shuttling between capitals, negotiating with a government that semi-keeps promises of cease-fires and fails to make effective troop withdrawals.
The toll of dead Syrians ¡ª fighters from government and opposition, but also civilians ¡ª mounts daily, at least according to Syrian opposition groups.
In an age when media folk talk constantly of the power of new digital technology, it is surprisingly hard for outsiders to verify the account of either side. YouTube shows us video that looks real ¡ª in some cases, depressingly like Sarajevo 20 years ago ¡ª and Twitter rallies the courageous to shout opposition to the government in the streets. But what is really happening?
