SEOUL ¡ª After leading the besieged governing party to an upset election victory, Park Geun-hye on Thursday visited the national cemetery, where the dead of the Korean War are buried, and wrote in a visitors¡¯ book: ¡°I will create a new .¡±
That highly symbolic gesture spoke volumes about Ms. Park and the role she played in the parliamentary election Wednesday, in which her New Frontier Party retained a majority it was widely forecast to lose.
Ms. Park, 60 and never married, is the daughter of the closest South Korea has to a nation-builder: the late President Park Chung-hee, a figure both despised as a dictator and revered as a visionary who marshaled the country into a rags-to-riches economic success story.
More than three decades after her father¡¯s assassination by his own spy chief and after years of watching liberals¡¯ attempts to discredit her father, Ms. Park is determined to make her own mark in South Korean history by being elected its first female president later this year. She saw a high-risk opportunity to prove herself in the National Assembly elections this week.
She took over the leadership of the deeply unpopular New Frontier Party late last year and started crisscrossing the country as if she were on her own presidential campaign trail. By the time the balloting began, her right hand was bruised ¡ª and bandaged ¡ª from shaking hands with so many people.
¡°She turned this parliamentary election into a presidential campaign,¡± said Bae Jong-chan, research director at Research and Research, an opinion survey firm. ¡°Many people, especially those in the countryside, voted for her, not for her party¡¯s candidate in their district.¡±
The result was a political bonanza, with Ms. Park now firmly established as her party¡¯s most likely nominee for the presidential election in December.
Once an undisputed leader among potential candidates for December, in recent years her standing in opinion surveys had slipped. Politically active young South Koreans tended to regard her as a lackluster politician who depended more on nostalgia among older conservatives for her father¡¯s days than on her own platform. Jabbing at her family background and at her habit of carrying a paper notepad in an era of iPads and laptops, they gave her the mocking nickname of ¡°princess with the notepad.¡±
The Wednesday election restores some of the image she has painstakingly cultivated since she entered politics in the late 1990s: a quiet but steely leader who shines as a crisis manager. Her admirers call her ¡°queen of elections¡± for employing her charms with conservatives to save the party from a potentially disastrous parliamentary vote in 2004.
On Wednesday, her New Frontier Party won 152 seats in the 300-seat National Assembly, down from its current 162 seats. Its main opposition rival, the liberal Democratic United Party, won 127.
Still, the party¡¯s diminished hold on the majority was considered a dramatic victory for New Frontier. Beset for months by a series of scandals implicating President Lee Myung-bak¡¯s former aides and relatives, the party had expected a major defeat.
Her approach was daring, and lucky, analysts said. After she took over its leadership, she essentially turned the party into her own, jettisoning its old name, Grand National Party, and distancing herself from the unpopular Mr. Lee. She effectively derailed the opposition, which had assumed it could easily win a landslide by turning the parliamentary election into a referendum on Mr. Lee.
¡°When she became the face of the party, the opposition no longer had a clear target,¡± Mr. Bae said.
Democratic United urged voters to punish what it called the ¡°Lee Myung-park Geun-hye government.¡± But by Thursday, Park Yong-jin, the main opposition spokesman, admitted that his party had failed to translate widespread discontent with the governing camp into opposition votes.
Blunder after blunder undermined its chances. It nominated an Internet talk-show host in a district in Seoul, but took a drubbing in the final days of the campaign when it was revealed that years ago the man had made sexist jokes.
