MOGADISHU, Somalia ¡ª A bomb exploded during a ceremony on Wednesday at the newly reopened National Theater here in the Somali capital as the prime minister was addressing the guests, turning an event that had been a welcome sign of growing calm into a grisly reminder of the many troubles still plaguing the country.
Somalia¡¯s Ministry of Information said that four people, including two prominent sports officials, were killed, though officials said the prime minister, Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, was unhurt. Ten journalists and a lawmaker were wounded.
Somali officials and some witnesses said a female suicide bomber was responsible. But in a claim of responsibility, Somalia¡¯s radical Islamist insurgent group, the Shabab, said its operatives had planted explosives at the theater in advance. ¡°Everything was carefully planned and orchestrated,¡± the organization said in a
The blast came amid significant signs of improvement in the capital, Mogadishu, a rubble-filled city ravaged by 21 years of civil war. Mogadishu has been enjoying a prolonged period of relative peace, preserved in part by 10,000 African Union troops, soon to be increased to 17,000, who patrol the streets in tanks and armored personnel carriers.
Hundreds of thousands of residents have returned in recent months, aid groups said, fueling an economic boom that has created thousands of jobs and has begun to draw young men away from violence. Construction is taking place across the city, yielding new hospitals, homes, shops and a hotel.
In August, the Shabab abruptly withdrew their forces from the capital but vowed to continue to attack the government. In the past several months, the group has struck a number of times with suicide bombs and other explosives, killing government officials and hundreds of civilians. It has continued its attacks despite having lost much of its territory to African Union, Ethiopian, Kenyan and local forces.
In many ways, the National Theater was an obvious target. People gathered there to sing and dance and smoke cigarettes, and men and women openly mingled, all of which the Shabab vehemently oppose.
The theater, which shut down in the early 1990s, when Mogadishu plunged into violence, reopened last month, becoming one of the most celebrated symbols of the city¡¯s turnaround. It had recently held its first concert in more than two decades, after having been used as a weapons depot and then as a toilet.
But the powerful blast transformed the hopeful gathering there late Wednesday morning into a macabre scene. Photographs showed one of the dead slumped but still seated in his black chair as sunlight streamed into the theater. Security forces helped dazed and bloodied survivors to ambulances outside.
¡°The reopening of the National Theater is symbolic of the real change that is happening in Somalia: the city is being rebuilt, culture is being revived and hope is being restored,¡± the United Nations secretary general¡¯s special representative for Somalia, Augustine P. Mahiga, . ¡°My heart goes out to the families of those killed today and the tragedy they have suffered.¡±
After the reported deaths of the sports officials, Aden Yabarow Wiish, the president of the Somali Olympic Committee, and Said Mohamed Nur, the chief of the country¡¯s soccer federation, the International Olympic Committee said in a statement that both men had been ¡°engaged in improving the lives of Somalian people through sport, and we strongly condemn such an act of barbarism.¡±
