KABUL, Afghanistan ¡ª Accelerating the transition of military responsibility to the Afghan government, the United States agreed Sunday to hand control of special operations missions to Afghan forces, including night raids, relegating American troops to a supporting role and bringing the raids under Afghan judicial authority.
The deal clears the way for the two countries to move ahead with a more comprehensive partnership agreement that will establish the shape of American support to Afghanistan after the 2014 troop withdrawal deadline. And it resolves one of the most contentious issues for President , who faced intense domestic political pressure because of night raids¡¯ deep unpopularity here, even as American commanders had insisted they were the linchpin of the military mission in Afghanistan.
As recently as a year ago, American commanders expressed reservations about giving up nearly any measure of control over the raids. Since then, the relationship between the two countries has been reconfigured by a series of diplomatic crises and the American public¡¯s growing fatigue for the war, lending an increasing sense of imminence to the troop withdrawal.
At the same time, the United States has mounted an intense effort to move Afghan special operations forces to the fore, even as questions remain about the overall readiness of Afghan troops.
At a signing ceremony in the capital, Abdul Rahim Wardak, the Afghan defense minister, and Gen. , the American commander here, hailed the agreement as a positive sign of Afghanistan¡¯s sovereignty and the growing abilities of its special operations forces.
¡°This is an important step in strengthening the sovereignty of Afghanistan,¡± Mr. Wardak said, adding that it was ¡°a national goal¡± and ¡°a wish of the Afghan people¡± that raids be conducted and controlled by Afghans.
The memorandum of understanding signed on Sunday gives Afghan forces the lead role in night raid operations against suspected insurgents, and also requires an Afghan court warrant within 72 hours of a raid. A warrant can be issued after a raid only in cases where the intelligence needed to be acted on immediately, otherwise it must be executed in advance, according to Afghan officials.
Under the terms of the agreement, Afghan forces can still call on American troops for help and authorize them to enter Afghan residences and private compounds. The agreement covers all night raids carried out by special operations forces. However, a small number of night operations are conducted under other auspices, including special C.I.A.-trained units, that are not covered by the agreement, military and civilian officials said.
American officials close to the negotiations said that under the agreement, an interministry Afghan command center with representatives of the Defense and Interior Ministries, as well as the National Directorate of Security ¡ª the Afghan intelligence agency ¡ª would review or develop information about potential targets in consultation with Americans, who would continue to provide extensive intelligence support.
The interministry group would then decide whether to go after a target and send Afghan special operations forces to carry out the raid. The Afghans can request American assistance at any point in the operation ¡ª for intelligence, for backup military support, air support, medical evacuation and post-operation intelligence gathering.
Afghan officials said that the Americans would not have the right to question detainees. Currently, they can question detainees and hold them indefinitely without trial. In practice, however, Americans might well be called on ¡°to assist in an investigation,¡± said a United States official. The official emphasized that the relationship between Afghan and American troops was ¡°not an adversarial one,¡± and United States officials did not appear to be worried that Americans would be denied access to detainees.
Several diplomats said that the most important aspect of the agreement, which goes into effect immediately, was that the two countries could take the next steps to complete the transition to Afghan control and allow foreign forces to leave the country.
¡°There¡¯s still work to be done, but clearly we have some critical momentum now,¡± Ryan C. Crocker, the United States ambassador to Afghanistan, said as he left the signing ceremony.
