Disasters are a regular part of rocket science, as demonstrated by the American experience with its Vanguard program.
That slim rocket was meant to launch the nation¡¯s first satellite into orbit. But starting in August 1957, four static firings of its engines failed. Pressure soared as Moscow successfully sent its first satellite into orbit that October.
Reporters descended on Cape Canaveral, Fla. On Dec. 6, the countdown reached zero, and Vanguard lifted off the launching pad. It rose four feet before settling back in a churning ball of smoke and fire.
The Vanguard satellite fell clear and ¡°came comfortably to rest nearby, chirping innocently,¡± according to ¡°The Heavens and the Earth,¡± a history of the early days of the American space program. Early the following year, the United States was able to launch a satellite with a different rocket, and less than three months later, finally managed a successful Vanguard launch.
If the United States can learn from failure, maybe North Korea can, too. It needs to, after 14 years of failures in the development of rockets powerful enough to loft a satellite ¡ª particularly when its secretive leadership encourages its impoverished people to indulge in grandiose expectations.
In interviews, aerospace experts said major setbacks are a normal part of rocket programs and can produce crucial information for engineers struggling to identify problems and make improvements.
¡°This stuff is really hard to do,¡± David C. Wright, a senior scientist at the , a private group in Cambridge, Mass., said in an interview.
Dr. Wright noted that South Korea had twice recently failed to fire a satellite into orbit, first on Aug. 25, 2009, and then again on June 10, 2010. ¡°It¡¯s basically a very hard business,¡± he observed.
However, North Korea¡¯s failures have some experts scratching their heads. They note that Iran ¡ª which has drawn on North Korean expertise to build its own families of small and large rockets ¡ª is in many respects outdoing its instructor.
Tehran fired its first satellite into space in 2009, joining the elite club of nations that have used their own technologies to send objects into orbit.
Dr. Wright suggested that North Korea might be having problems with quality control.
¡°Their overall design seems to make sense,¡± he said. ¡°But mundane sorts of things might get in the way, such as welding. Putting it all together can be hard.¡±
