MIREBALAIS, Haiti ¡ª Jean Salgadeau Pelette, handsome when medicated and groomed, often roamed this central Haitian town in a disheveled state, wild-eyed and naked. He was a familiar figure here, the lanky scion of a prominent family who suffered from a mental illness.
On Oct. 16, 2010, Mr. Pelette, 38, woke at dawn in his solitary room behind a bric-a-brac shop off the town square. As was his habit, he loped down the hill to the Latem River for his bath, passing the beauty shop, the pharmacy and the funeral home where his body would soon be prepared for burial.
The river would have been busy that morning, with bathers, laundresses and schoolchildren brushing their teeth. Nobody thought of its flowing waters, downstream from a base, as toxic.
When Mr. Pelette was found lying by the bank a few hours later, he was so weak from a sudden, violent stomach illness that he had to be carried back to his room. It did not immediately occur to his relatives to rush him to the hospital.
¡°At that time, the word ¡®cholera¡¯ didn¡¯t yet exist,¡± said one of his brothers, Malherbe Pelette. ¡°We didn¡¯t know he was in mortal danger. But by 4 that afternoon, my brother was dead. He was the first victim, or so they say.¡±
In the 17 months since Mr. Pelette was buried in the trash-strewn graveyard here, cholera has killed more than 7,050 Haitians and sickened more than 531,000, or 5 percent of the population. Lightning fast and virulent, it spread from here through every Haitian state, erupting into the world¡¯s largest cholera epidemic despite a huge international mobilization still dealing with the effects of the Jan. 12, 2010, earthquake.
The world rallied to confront cholera, too, but the mission was muddled by the United Nations¡¯ apparent role in igniting the epidemic and its unwillingness to acknowledge it. Epidemiologic and microbiologic evidence strongly suggests that United Nations peacekeeping troops from imported cholera to Haiti, contaminated the river tributary next to their base through a faulty sanitation system and caused a second disaster.
¡°It was like throwing a lighted match into a gasoline-filled room,¡± said Dr. Paul S. Keim, a microbial geneticist whose laboratory determined that the Haitian and Nepalese cholera strains were virtually identical.
And, as the deaths and continuing caseload indicate, the world¡¯s response to this preventable, treatable scourge has proved inadequate. Cholera, never before recorded in Haiti, stayed one step ahead of the authorities as they shifted gears from the earthquake recovery. While eventually effective in reducing the fatality rate, the response was slow to get fully under way, conservative and insufficiently sustained.
¡°In the future, historians will look back and say, ¡®Wow, that¡¯s unfortunate,¡¯?¡± said Dr. Paul Farmer, co-founder of , a nongovernmental organization that provides health care for the poor. ¡°This unfolded right under the noses of all those NGOs. And they will ask, ¡®Why didn¡¯t they try harder? Why didn¡¯t they throw the kitchen sink at cholera in Haiti?¡¯?¡±
While the world has dedicated $230 million so far to combating the unexpected epidemic, the United Nations is now pleading for an additional $53.9 million just to get the vulnerable displaced population through the rainy months ahead.
At the same time, Haitian cholera victims are seeking compensation from the United Nations, pressing it to accept responsibility. Early on, protests against the United Nations hindered the construction of treatment centers and the delivery of lifesaving supplies. Now distrust of some cholera programs lingers, and the issue has strained the peacekeepers¡¯ relationship with the Haitians they are protecting in an eight-year-old mission to stabilize the politically volatile nation. So, too, have unrelated allegations that they engaged in criminally abusive behavior.
¡°In telling the truth, the U.N. could have gained the trust of the population and facilitated the fight against cholera,¡± said Dr. Renaud Piarroux, who led an early investigation into the outbreak. ¡°But that was bungled.¡±
The United Nations maintains that an independent panel of experts determined the evidence implicating its troops to be inconclusive.
Questioned for this article, though, those same experts said that Dr. Keim¡¯s work, conducted after their own, provides ¡°irrefutable molecular evidence¡± that Haiti¡¯s cholera came from Nepal, in the words of G. Balakrish Nair, an Indian microbiologist.
¡°When you take the circumstantial evidence in our report and all that has come out since, the story now I think is stronger: the most likely scenario is that the cholera began with someone at the base,¡± said another expert, Daniele Lantagne, an American engineer, using the French acronym for the United Nations mission.
Even so, Anthony Banbury, a United Nations assistant secretary general, said last week, ¡°We don¡¯t think the cholera outbreak is attributable to any single factor.¡±
Many health officials consider the cholera response ¡°pretty remarkable,¡± as John Vertefeuille, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention¡¯s director in Haiti, said.
