CAPE TOWN ¡ª For countless foreign visitors, Cape Town is an indelible symbol of the beauty and promise of post-apartheid . Beyond its gorgeous scenery and great wines, its very logo ¡ª an outline of majestic Table Mountain superimposed over a rainbow ¡ª emphasizes its historic mix of races and cultures, and its most famous resident, Desmond Tutu, is revered as a symbol of tolerance, inclusiveness and forgiveness.
But for many black South Africans, this city represents something very different: the last bastion of white rule.
¡°No matter how famous/rich u r, ur still a 2nd class citizen if ur Black in Cape Town,¡± Lindiwe Suttle, a singer and performance artist, wrote in a to Helen Zille, the white leader of the party that governs this city.
After the post drew a chorus of support from black celebrities and others in the echo chamber of Twitter, Ms. Zille shot back, ¡°What complete nonsense.¡±
But that was hardly the last word. , which broke out a few months ago and featured dueling hashtags (#capetownisracist and a countercampaign, #capetownisawesome), has given way to soul-searching in this city of 3.5 million people at the southern tip of Africa: Does this nation¡¯s celebrated rainbow end where the mountain meets the sea?
This is the only major metropolis in South Africa where black people are not the majority, and it remains deeply divided. The particularly harsh legacy of apartheid as it was carried out here has left especially deep scars that still demarcate the geography: whites in the city center and its mountainside inner suburbs, nonwhites in the distant townships on the Cape Flats. Apartheid policies effectively barred blacks from living or even working in the city, giving so-called colored, or mixed-race, people, today the city¡¯s largest ethnic group, priority over blacks for jobs and housing.
Beyond history, there is present-day politics. Western Cape is the only one of the country¡¯s nine provinces not run by the governing African National Congress. It is run by Ms. Zille¡¯s Democratic Alliance, which grew out of the white anti-apartheid movement but ultimately came to include remnants of the old National Party that created apartheid.
In a speech last year in a black township near Cape Town, South Africa¡¯s president, Jacob Zuma, said the city had an ¡°extremely apartheid system,¡± according to local newspaper reports on his remarks. The African National Congress is trying to win the province, and the Democratic Alliance has dismissed the assertion that Cape Town is racist as a political ploy.
¡°It is labeled a racist city by the A.N.C. because it is the only metro in the country they don¡¯t control,¡± said Patricia de Lille, the mayor of Cape Town.
The city government is trying hard to change what Ms. de Lille calls ¡°the spatial development of apartheid.¡± It has renamed two major boulevards in honor of Nelson Mandela, South Africa¡¯s first black president, and Helen Suzman, an ardent white opponent of apartheid. The two streets converge in the center of the city, a merger meant to symbolize the hope of integration.
But a study completed by researchers at the University of Cape Town in December 2010 found that black residents saw few business opportunities for themselves in Cape Town, and that companies struggled to recruit and retain them. It concluded that in Western Cape, ¡°African people are almost always less successful than white people in moving up career paths, creating an ¡®ebony ceiling¡¯ effect.¡±
The office is not the only place where blacks feel unwelcome. Many of the more exclusive Atlantic coast beaches, which used to prohibit blacks, still tend to attract almost entirely whites, reinforcing the divide.
¡°I hate going to Camps Bay because everyone there is white,¡± said Yoliswa Dwane, referring to an upscale seaside suburb on the Atlantic coast that was once reserved for whites. ¡°You don¡¯t get the perception that this is an integrated country.¡±
The discrimination black South Africans describe experiencing here is not the iron-fisted kind that marked the apartheid era. It is more subtle and sometimes hard to pin down.
