SAN SALVADOR ¡ª In a prison called Hope, there is little of it to go around.
Inmates at La Esperanza penitentiary here cram into ¡°the caves,¡± their name for the suffocating spaces underneath bunk beds, desperate for a place to sleep. Others sprawl out on every inch of floor under a thicket of exposed electrical wires in sweltering, dirty cells, until they can come up with the $35 or more they will need to buy space on a bunk from fellow prisoners. In these tight quarters, it has become a flourishing trade.
The 19 prisons in this country were built to hold 8,000 people. These days, 24,000 are stuffed into them, leaving inmates to string hammocks from the ceiling or bed down on the floor of a library that is now too full of prisoners to hold any books.
Such overcrowding is not uncommon in Latin America. But after a grisly prison fire last month and a less than a week later, prison administrators and investigators are warning that the problem has sunk to new depths, spurred by the growing power of criminal groups and the mounting demand to stop them.
Public frustration with murders, robberies, rapes and assaults has led to law enforcement crackdowns that emphasize arrests over prosecution, swelling prisons and jails sometimes two, three or four times beyond capacity with inmates who have typically never gone on trial, much less been convicted.
At a prison in San Pedro Sula, Honduras, Santos Vicente Hern¨¢ndez clambered out of a wheelchair and dragged himself across filthy floors to a bathroom. He was paralyzed in a shootout and arrested for murder 12 years ago, yet he is still waiting to get a trial, he said. At his penitentiary, nearly two-thirds of the 2,250 inmates ¡ª in a prison built for 800 ¡ª have not been formally convicted, government statistics show.
¡°I¡¯d rather be dead than here,¡± Mr. Hern¨¢ndez said.
Venezuelan officials said the number of prisoners awaiting sentencing or trial had dropped to about 50 percent, though independent monitors put it at 66 percent to 70 percent. Across Honduras, 53 percent of inmates have not been tried or sentenced, according to government officials there. In Guatemala, the figure is 54 percent; in , it is 30 percent; and in Panama, it is 61 percent, according to the , a research group in England. (In the United States, it is 21 percent, the group says.)
Human rights observers have repeatedly sounded alarms about the crowding and deteriorating conditions. After the fire in Honduras, believed to have been caused by a match or cigarette left accidentally on bedding, the office of the United Nations high commissioner for human rights lamented an ¡°,¡± citing cases in Uruguay, Venezuela, Chile, Argentina and Panama.
Hearings are held. Reports issued. Promises made.
But still, ¡°we will be talking again in two months because there will be another incident and more,¡± said Santiago A. Canton, the executive secretary of the , which has visited 20 prisons in the last decade and issued reports on several. ¡°It is getting worse, but it has been bad for a long time.¡±
The prison world is often an upside-down, alternative universe with little public or political will to right it.
¡°Our budget does not have a lot of resources,¡± said Nelson Rauda, the director of prisons in El Salvador. ¡°If the choice is to build a children¡¯s hospital or a prison, which do you think is going to get done?¡±

The cycle of disaster, death and denouncement repeats with a macabre monotony.
More than 100 inmates died in at the prison where Mr. Hern¨¢ndez is held. Little has changed since. Sparks still fly from wires high above the courtyard when it rains. Beams remain bent and disfigured. Asked what prison officials had done to improve conditions since the fire, a group of guards laughed.
¡°We are waiting for a new prison,¡± said Jorge Rubio, a top official.
Prison, of course, is supposed to be unpleasant. But investigators complain that necessities like water come and go in several prisons in the region and that infections, rashes, respiratory distress and other maladies are widespread, with little treatment.
Prisoners sell their food, clothes ¡ª sometimes their bodies ¡ª to earn enough money for bed space, soap and toothpaste.
Salvadoran officials said they were seeking to rehabilitate more prisoners, but the effort often falls short. Classes are few at La Esperanza and other prisons, where inmates sometimes take it upon themselves to teach.
¡°We have no books or nothing, but I do my best,¡± said Marvin Flores, 37, a deported felon who spent half of his life in Los Angeles and is serving time for a gang-related extortion. He teaches English to fellow inmates.
In the past decade, Honduras, El Salvador and other countries have increased penalties for gang crimes, sometimes applying a broad definition of membership, including having certain tattoos.
