MATAMOROS, Mexico ¡ª They have spotted their stolen vehicles at stoplights, driven by the same gunmen who used them to take their entire family captive last July. They have reported the brazen abduction to every branch of Mexican law enforcement, only to be ignored, or directed someplace else.
For the women of the Cazares family who were kidnapped with their families for ransom ¡ª and who are still searching for five missing relatives ¡ª the official response to their horrific ordeal has been even more excruciating than the crime itself. Even now, they say, after months of trying to goad the Mexican authorities into action, they still see criminals they recognize living large here in this border city, as untouchable as kings.
¡°We¡¯re completely impotent,¡± said Zynthia Cazares, 30, an American citizen who was among those abducted and whose husband, brother and father are still missing. ¡°No one will help us.¡±
Six years into a mostly military assault on drug cartels, impunity across much of Mexico has worsened, and justice is harder to find. Criminals in Mexico are less likely to be punished now than even just a few years ago, say current and former government officials and experts who have studied Mexico¡¯s ailing judiciary, because the authorities have been overwhelmed by increases in violent crime while corruption, fear and incompetence have continued to keep the justice system weak.
Many areas now veer toward lawlessness: in 14 of Mexico¡¯s 31 states, the chance of a crime¡¯s leading to trial and sentencing was less than 1 percent in 2010, according to government figures analyzed by a Mexican research institute known as Cidac. And since then, experts say, attempts at reform have stalled as crime and impunity have become cozy partners.
¡°Crime goes up, diminishing the likelihood of punishment, which causes crime to rise again,¡± said Alejandro Hope, a former senior intelligence officer for Mexico. ¡°And so we go.¡±
Kidnappings in particular are fueled by this dynamic. Reported abductions have jumped by more than 300 percent since 2005 ¡ª to levels on par with Mexico¡¯s kidnapping wave in the late 1990s ¡ª in part, experts say, because criminal gangs have become better organized and freer to commit crimes without being punished.
Some Mexican officials counter that the kidnappings illustrate the desperation that criminal groups find themselves in after years of battling the government. These officials argue that the training programs and increased coordination among the authorities have strengthened the system. But researchers say that kidnappings, which require teams of captors, safe houses and a degree of territorial control, flourish when the state is particularly feeble. Studies also show that kidnappings destroy a city¡¯s sense of security and its economy even more than murders do.
The Cazares case is a telling example: 18 family members were taken from three homes in Matamoros over a few hours on the morning of July 9. Their houses and offices are now shuttered, stripped nearly bare by thieves.
Their barbarous calamity has been pieced together through interviews with a half dozen relatives, personal notes, and correspondence with Mexican and American authorities.
Even with some details and names left out for security reasons, the Cazares case shows how border towns like Matamoros ¡ª across from Brownsville, Tex., and with a population of 490,000 ¡ª run according to rules defined less by government than by gangs that exhibit both sophistication and the heedlessness born of committing crimes in a void, when the chances of getting caught can barely be measured.
The case also shows how various levels of the Mexican government pay lip service to helping crime victims, without doing much else.
Even for families with wealth and connections ¡ª the Cazareses¡¯ ranks include government contractors and engineers with decades of government service ¡ª Mexican law enforcement is virtually useless.
¡°It¡¯s unacceptable,¡± said one of the women of the Cazares family, explaining why her family has chosen to speak out. ¡°This has to end.¡±

